2021학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 재활용 쓰레기 분리 배출 방법을  안내하려고
② 재활용 쓰레기 배출 시간 준수를  당부하려고


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 다른 주문처를 찾고 있는 이유를 고르시오.
① 더 좋은 품질을 원해서
② 더 빠른 배송을 원해서
③ 더 싼 가격을 원해서
④ 무료 배송을 원해서
⑤ 대량 주문을 원해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Delizia에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

③재활용쓰레기분리수거 요일 변경을 공지하려고① 창업 연도② 창업자③ 예약 방법④
⑤재활용
재활용쓰레기
쓰레기관련 주민 회의 결과를 알려주려고
분리수거 관련 공청회 참석을 요청하려고④ 장소 협찬 영화⑤ 야외 정원

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 적합한 조리 도구 사용은 요리를 쉽고 즐겁게 해 준다.
② 요리 동영상을 참고하면 누구나 요리를 할 수 있다.
③ 같은 재료라도 조리법에 따라 음식 맛이 달라진다.
④ 조리 도구는 훌륭한 인테리어 소품이 될 수 있다.
⑤ 조리 도구를 청결하게 관리하는 것이 중요하다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 꽃꽂이 강사 - 수강생	② 택배 기사 - 수령인
③ 웨딩 플래너 - 예비 신부	④ 꽃 판매 상인 - 사진작가
⑤ 인테리어 디자이너 - 건축가

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 물 가져가기	② 안내 방송하기
③ 카메라 설치하기	④ 배터리 충전하기
⑤ 구급상자 챙기기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $117	② $130	③ $135	④ $150	⑤ $161

9. Nest Cave Boat Tour에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1시간 동안 진행된다.
② 보트당 최대 탑승 인원은 10명이다.
③ 동굴의 역사에 관해 들을 수 있다.
④ 동굴 내에서 사진 촬영을 할 수 있다.
⑤ 사전에 예약을 해야 한다.

10.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 주문할 사다리를 고 르시오.
Stepladders


①
②
③
④
⑤

1.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Actually, it leads to the basement of the store.
② Please connect me with the marketing department.
③ No, the menswear is on the fifth floor of the store.
④ Well, the department store opens at 10 in the morning.
⑤ Not exactly. This is the direct number of the department.

12.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Of course. She’ll be very happy to see you.
② Thank you for the ride. Say hello to Daniel.
③ How nice! I’ll call and thank her for the ride.
④ Never mind. I’ll take a bus to the baseball field.
⑤ Hurry up. You’ll be late for baseball practice again.




2	영어 영역


13.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Great. It’ll be really nice if we sing together.
② Thank you. I had a great time in your choir.
③ Think twice. It’s not easy to sing in a choir.
④ Actually, I’m not a big fan of classical music.
⑤ Never mind. The choir practice has been canceled.


14.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m afraid I can’t go with you this time.
② I’m glad you’ve done the farm work in time.
③ Unfortunately, there are no more apples to pick.
④ Thank you for the apples you sent me last week.
⑤ You’ll enjoy it. It’s hard work but very rewarding.


15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Katrina가  Simon에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Katrina:  	
① Let’s go bicycle riding as often as possible.
② Go to the hospital before the pain gets worse.
③ You shouldn’t do risky things while riding a bicycle.
④ I’ll let you know the repair shop that I often go to.
⑤ You’re brave to ride a bicycle with no hands.


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① colors to help animals protect themselves
② English animal expressions and their meanings
③ animal sounds expressed in different languages
④ classroom animal games and activities for children
⑤ animals that appear frequently in children’s stories


17.언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① snail	② horse	③ hawk
④ monkey	⑤ snake




18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 상품 선호도를 조사하려고
② 새로운 마케팅 전략을 제안하려고
③ 판매 상품에 대한 정보를 제공하려고
④ 판매 계약 연장에 대해 논의하려고
⑤ 농산물 축제에 초대하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I was waiting outside when the exam grades were posted on the bulletin board. I was perspiring. My heart started beating fast. What if I failed? A swarm of students rushed forward to see the exam results. Fortunately, I was tall enough to see over their heads. The minute I saw the results, all my anxiety disappeared. I walked quickly back to my dormitory and phoned my father. “Dad,” I mumbled in a haze. “You won’t believe this, but I passed the exams.” My father was speechless. Finally he said, “Son, that is good news. I frankly never thought you’d do it.” I was overjoyed as if I were walking on the cloud.
① anticipating → disappointed	② worried → delighted
③ surprised → calm	④ curious → envious
⑤ bored → excited

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Good teachers know that learning occurs when students compare what they already know with the new ideas presented by the teacher or textbook. It is the students who decide whether or not to reconstruct their conceptions; therefore, teaching should be student centered rather than teacher centered. This means that students should be actively involved in making and interpreting analogies. If we believe that analogy use is an effective way to help students think and learn, then it makes sense to help students generate their own analogies or reconstruct the teacher’s analogies to fit in with their own experiences.
① 학습 내용은 학생 수준에 맞는 난이도로 구성되어야 한다.
② 다양한 사례를 활용하여 학생의 이해를 도와야  한다.
③ 교사는 수업 중 학생과 상호 작용을 많이 해야 한다.
④ 교육 활동에서 이론보다 실습의 비중을 더 높여야 한다.
⑤ 유추를 해내고 재구성하는 과정이 학생 중심이어야 한다.




영어 영역	3


21.밑줄  친  last  in,  first  out이  다음  글에서  의미하는  바로  가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　While user habits are a boon to companies fortunate enough to generate them, their existence inherently makes success less likely for new innovations and startups trying to disrupt the status quo. The fact is, successfully changing long­term user habits is exceptionally rare. Altering behavior requires not only an understanding of how to persuade people to act but also necessitates getting them to repeat behaviors for long periods, ideally for the rest of their lives. Companies that succeed in building a habit­forming business are often associated with game­changing, wildly successful innovation. But like any discipline, habit design has rules that define and explain why some products change lives while others do not. For one, new behaviors have a short half­life, as our minds tend to return to our old ways of thinking and doing. Experiments show that lab animals habituated to new behaviors tend to regress to their first learned behaviors over time. To borrow a term from accounting, behaviors are LIFO ─ “last in, first out.”
* boon: 요긴한 것 ** regress: 되돌아가다
① The behavior witnessed first is forgotten first.
② Almost any behavior tends to change over time.
③ After an old habit breaks, a new one is formed.
④ The habit formed last is the hardest to get rid of.
⑤ The habit most recently acquired disappears soonest.


2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Despite numerous studies on the influence of mediated agendas on politics, most studies examine text only ? as if media only deliver words. These studies looked at how reporters, analysts, and commentators verbally describe and criticize the candidates. But they often neglect another important source of influence: visuals. As some communication scholars said, “Stories are often complex combinations of visual and verbal content ? all too often the visual information is so powerful that it overwhelms the verbal.” The challenge of tackling visuals to examine their influence is multifaceted. The difficulties of gathering and coding visual data and of attributing impact to specific parts of images have no doubt caused veritable scholars to shy away. But the potential impact of visuals on people’s perceptions is simply too important to ignore. Furthermore, the importance of understanding both visuals and text in tandem cannot be understated.
* veritable: 진정한 ** in tandem: 동시에
① 시각 자료는 정치 관련 보도 자료 연구의 중요한  대상이다.
② 전문가들의 의견도 철저하게 검증하고 보도할 필요가 있다.
③ 다양한 관심사를 반영하는 뉴스 프로그램 편성이 요구된다.
④ 지나치게 방대한 시각 자료는 보도 내용 이해에 방해가 된다.
⑤ 언론인은 보도에서 자신의 정치적 편향을 드러내서는 안 된다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Despite excellent training, actors inevitably experience the visceral life of their characters, even if it is for brief moments during a performance. Self­perceptions are altered during the course of a performance, and even more so during long performance seasons. For many actors, they experience greater empathy and social cognition for their character, which may intensify identity boundary blurring. As well, actors tend to employ more dissociative processes, which increase potential character boundary blurring. Actors also experience more unresolved mourning for past trauma and loss experiences because they continually draw from these experiences when portraying characters. Adding to this tendency to merge with the creative work, audience members also confuse the character’s personality with the actor’s personality. Audience attribution errors may increase distress in the actor, including fearing that their personality identity is not stable.
* visceral: 마음속에서 느끼는 ** dissociative: 분리적인
① criteria for evaluating an actor’s performance
② difficulties in portraying  complicated characters
③ background knowledge for appreciating the play
④ confusion of identity between actor and character
⑤ psychological barriers between actors and the audience




24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There is a story about F. Yates, a prominent UK statistician. During his student years at St. John’s College, Cambridge, Yates had been keen on a form of sport. It consisted of climbing about the roofs and towers of the college buildings at night. In particular, the chapel of St. John’s College has a massive neo­Gothic tower adorned with statues of saints, and to Yates it appeared obvious that it would be more decorous if these saints were properly attired in surplices. One night he climbed up and did the job; next morning the result was generally much admired. But the College authorities were unappreciative and began to consider means of divesting the saints of their newly acquired garments. This was not easy, since they were well out of reach of any ordinary ladder. An attempt to lift the surplices off from above, using ropes with hooks attached, was unsuccessful. No progress was being made and eventually Yates came forward and volunteered to climb up in the daylight and bring them down. This he did to the admiration of the crowd that assembled.
* decorous: 품위 있는 ** surplice: 흰 가운 *** divest: 벗기다
① A Scary Legend About the Statues at St. John’s College
② A Student Who Solved a Problem of His Own Making
③ Standards of Beauty Varying from Person to Person
④ A Smart Professor Who Identified a Criminal
⑤ A Success Story of a Mysterious Architect




4	영어 영역


25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above shows the top five composers ranked by the number of performances in concerts worldwide from 2015 to 2017. ① In 2015 and 2017, Mozart was the most performed composer, with more than 3,000 performances each year. ② For all three years, the least performed composer was Schubert, whose music was performed less than 2,000 times each year. ③ The three composers whose rankings in the number of performances remained the same throughout the whole period were Beethoven, Brahms, and Schubert. ④ As for the two composers, Bach and Schubert, the number of performances steadily increased from 2015 to 2017. ⑤ The gap in the number of performances between Beethoven and Bach was the largest in 2016 and the smallest in 2017.



26. Herbert Shelton에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Herbert Shelton was born on October 6, 1895 in Wylie, Texas. As a child, Shelton took an interest in animals, especially their habits when sick as compared to when well. Shelton attended Bernarr Macfadden’s College of Physcultopathy in Chicago and interned at Crane’s Sanatorium in Elmhurst, Illinois. In 1921, he graduated from the American School of Naturopathy with a Doctor of Naturopathic Medicine. Shelton claimed that cooking food denatures it, and that a healthy body has the ability to restore itself from illness without medical intervention. Although heavily criticized by his contemporaries for advocating fasting over medical treatment, Shelton’s work served as an early influence for the raw food movement. A pacifist, Shelton was jailed in 1917 for making an anti­draft statement in public during the height of World War I. By 1972, at the age of 77, Shelton became bedridden from Parkinson’s disease. He died thirteen years later.
* anti­draft: 징병 반대의
① 병에 걸린 동물의 습성에 관심을 가졌다.
② Crane’s Sanatorium에서 인턴으로 일했다.
③ 의학적 치료보다 단식을 옹호했다.
④ 1917년에 투옥되었다.
⑤ 파킨슨병을 앓다가 77세에 사망했다.
27. 
Wingstar Drone에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 비행시간은 약 20분이다.
② 송신기에는 네 개의 AAA 건전지가 필요하다.
③ 드론 사용 경험이 없는 초보자에게 적합한 제품이다.
④ 드론 배터리는 5℃에서 27℃ 사이의 실온에서 보관해야 한다.
⑤ 추락 후에는 드론 배터리 및 연결 상태를 점검해야 한다.




28. Grace Foundation Logo Design Contest에 관한 다음 안내문 의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 학생의 참가비는 30달러이다.
② 모든 입상자에게 1,000달러씩 수여한다.
③ 대회는 3개월간 진행된다.
④ 출품작은 PDF 형식으로 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 입상자는 전화로 개별 통보한다.




영어 영역	5


29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The formats and frequencies of traditional trade encompass a spectrum. At the simplest level ① are the occasional trips made by individual !Kung and Dani to visit their individual trading partners in other bands or villages. ② Suggestive of our open­air markets and flea markets were the occasional markets at which Sio villagers living on the coast of northeast New Guinea met New Guineans from inland villages. Up to a few dozen people from each side ③ sat down in rows facing each other. An inlander pushed forward a net bag containing between 10 and 35 pounds of taro and sweet potatoes, and the Sio villager sitting opposite responded by offering a number of pots and coconuts ④ judging equivalent in value to the bag of food. Trobriand Island canoe traders conducted similar markets on the islands ⑤ that they visited, exchanging utilitarian goods (food, pots, and bowls) by barter, at the same time as they and their individual trade partners gave each other reciprocated gifts of luxury items (shell necklaces and armbands).
* taro: (식물) 타로토란 ** reciprocate: 답례하다










30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Those who limit themselves to Western scientific research have virtually ① ignored anything that cannot be perceived by the five senses and repeatedly measured or quantified. Research is dismissed as superstitious and invalid if it cannot be scientifically explained by cause and effect. Many continue to ② object with an almost religious passion to this cultural paradigm about the power of science ? more specifically, the  power that science gives them. By dismissing non­Western scientific paradigms as inferior at best and inaccurate at worst, the most rigid members of the conventional medical research community try to ③ counter the threat that alternative therapies and research pose to their work, their well­being, and their worldviews. And yet, biomedical research cannot explain many of the phenomena that
④ concern alternative practitioners regarding caring­healing processes. When therapies such as acupuncture or homeopathy are observed to result in a physiological or clinical response that cannot be explained by the biomedical model, many have tried to ⑤ deny the results rather than modify the scientific model.
* acupuncture: 침술 ** homeopathy: 동종 요법

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. People unknowingly sabotage their own work when they withhold help or information from others or try to undermine them lest they become more successful or get more credit than “me.”	is alien to the ego, except when there is a secondary motive. The ego doesn’t know that the more you include others, the more smoothly things flow and the more easily things come to you. When you give little or no help to others or put obstacles in their path, the universe
― in the form of people and circumstances ― gives little or no help to you because you have cut yourself off from the whole. The ego’s unconscious core feeling of “not enough” causes it to react to someone else’s success as if that success had taken something away from “me.” It doesn’t know that your resentment of another person’s success curtails your own chances of success. In order to attract success, you need to welcome it wherever you see it. [3점]
* sabotage: 방해하다 ** curtail: 줄이다
① Patience
② Rationality
③ Independence
④ Competition
⑤ Cooperation





32. Jeffrey A. Rodgers, a vice president of a big company, was once taught the simple idea of pausing to refresh. It began when Jeff realized that as he drove home from work each evening his mind was still focused on work­related projects. We all know this feeling. We may have left the office physically, but we are very much still there mentally, as our minds get caught in the endless loop of replaying the events of today and worrying about all the things we need to get done the following day. So now, as he gets to the door of his house, he applies what he calls “the pause that refreshes.” He stops for just a moment. He closes his eyes. He breathes in and out once: deeply and slowly. As he exhales, he 	. This allows him to walk through the front door to his family with more singleness of purpose. It supports the sentiment attributed to Lao Tzu: “In work, do what you enjoy. In family life, be completely present.”
* loop: 루프(반복 실행되는 일련의 명령)
① lets the work issues fall away
② makes plans for tomorrow’s work
③ retraces the projects not completed yet
④ feels emotionally and physically exhausted
⑤ reflects on the achievements he made that day




6	영어 영역


3.Plants are genius chemists. They rely on their ability to manufacture chemical compounds for every single aspect of their survival. A plant with juicy leaves can’t run away to avoid being eaten. It relies on its own chemical defenses to kill microbes, deter pests, or poison would­be predators. Plants also need to reproduce. They can’t impress a potential mate with a fancy dance, a victory in horn­to­horn combat, or a well­constructed nest like animals do. Since plants need to attract pollinators to accomplish reproduction, they’ve evolved intoxicating scents, sweet nectar, and pheromones that send signals that bees and butterflies can’t resist. When you consider that plants solve almost all of their problems by making chemicals, and that there are nearly 400,000 species of plants on Earth, it’s no wonder that the plant kingdom is 	.
① a factory that continuously generates clean air
② a source for a dazzling array of useful substances
③ a silent battlefield in which plants fight for sunshine
④ a significant habitat for microorganisms at a global scale
⑤ a document that describes the primitive state of the earth








34. The meritocratic emphasis on effort and hard work seeks to vindicate the idea that, under the right conditions, we are responsible for our success and thus capable of freedom. It also seeks to vindicate the faith that, if the competition is truly fair, success will align with virtue; those who work hard and play by the rules will earn the rewards they deserve. We want to believe that success, in sports and in life, is something we earn, not something we inherit. Natural gifts and the advantages they bring embarrass the meritocratic faith. They cast doubt on the conviction that praise and rewards flow from effort alone. In the face of this embarrassment, we 	. This can be seen, for example, in television coverage of the Olympics, which focuses less on the feats the athletes perform than on heartbreaking stories of the hardships and obstacles they have overcome, and the struggles they have gone through to triumph over injury, or a difficult childhood, or political turmoil in their native land. [3점]
* meritocratic: 능력주의의 ** vindicate: (정당성을) 입증하다
① suspect perfectly fair competition is not possible
② inflate the moral significance of effort and striving
③ put more emphasis on the results than on the process
④ believe that overcoming hardships is not that important
⑤ often appreciate the rewards earned through natural gifts

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Cyber attacks on air traffic control systems have become a leading security concern. ① The federal government released a report in 2009 stating that the nation’s air traffic control system is vulnerable to a cyber attack that could interrupt communication with pilots and alter the flight information used to separate aircraft as they approach an airport. ② The report found numerous security problems in airline computer systems, including easy­to­crack passwords and unencrypted file folders, issues that could give invaders easy access. ③ A cyber attack on air traffic has the potential to kill many people and could cripple the country’s entire airline industry.
④ Unprecedented declines in consumer demand impacted the profitability of the airline industry, changing the face of aircraft travel for the foreseeable future. ⑤ Tightening airline computer security could be even more important than conducting security screenings of passengers, because in an increasingly cyber­oriented world, plane hijackers of the future may not even be on board.
* unencrypted: 암호화되지 않은 ** cripple: 무력하게 만들다


[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것 을 고르시오.
36.


(A) One infrastructure that allows efficient exchange is transportation, which makes it possible for producers to trade their surpluses even when they are separated by distance. Another is money, interest, and middlemen, which allow producers to exchange many kinds of surpluses with many other producers at many points in time.
(B) If a farmer has more grain than he can eat, and a herder has more milk than he can drink, both of them come out ahead if they trade some wheat for some milk. As they say, everybody wins. Of course, an exchange at a single moment in time only pays when there is a division of labor.
(C) There would be no point in one farmer giving a bushel of wheat to another farmer and receiving a bushel of wheat in return. A fundamental insight of modern economics is that the key to the creation of wealth is a division of labor, in which specialists learn to produce a commodity with increasing cost­effectiveness and have the means to exchange their specialized products efficiently. [3점]
① (A) ­ (C) ­ (B)	② (B) ­ (A) ­ (C)
③ (B) ­ (C) ­ (A)	④ (C) ­ (A) ­ (B)
⑤ (C) ­ (B) ­ (A)




영어 영역	7

37.	39.




(A) Is she there because she really wants to be, or is she there just because her brother is also a runner and so her parents bring her along as well? Motivation is a key factor in sports training and performance.
(B) On the contrary, if she had a tailwind her performance would be enhanced and movement assisted by the wind. Let us also consider other surrounding circumstances, such as what is motivating the athlete to run.
(C) During athletic competitions wind speed is always measured as it is recognised as having an impact, either positively or negatively, on performance times. If our runner was running into a headwind, her speed would be reduced, as some of her force would be needed to overcome the additional obstacle of the wind.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Bundle pricing is packaging together two or more products, usually complementary ones, to be sold for a single price, which is usually considerably less than the sum of the prices of the individual products. ( ① ) Bundle pricing facilitates customer satisfaction and, when slow­moving products are bundled with products with higher turnover, can help a company stimulate sales and increase revenues. ( ② ) Selling products as a package rather than individually also may result in cost savings, so bundle pricing is commonly used for banking and travel services, computers, and automobiles with option packages. ( ③ ) This provides customers with the opportunity to pick and choose the products they want without having to purchase bundles that may not be the right mix for their purposes. ( ④ ) Furthermore, with the help of the Internet, comparison shopping has become more convenient than ever, allowing customers to price items and create their own mixes. ( ⑤ ) Nevertheless, bundle pricing continues to appeal to customers who prefer the convenience of a package. [3점]
* ?la carte pricing: 따로따로 책정하는 가격

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Wind direction is usually measured through the use of a simple vane. ( ① ) This is simply a paddle of some sort mounted on a spindle; when it catches the wind, it turns so that the wind passes by without obstruction. ( ② ) The direction is recorded, but if you ever have a chance to watch a wind vane on a breezy day, you will notice that there is a lot of variation in the direction of wind flow ― a lot! ( ③ ) Sometimes the wind can blow from virtually every direction within a minute or two. ( ④ ) Either way, it is  a generalization, and it’s important to remember that there can be a lot of variation in the data. ( ⑤ ) It’s also important to remember that the data recorded at a weather station give an indication of conditions prevailing in an area but will not be exactly the same as the conditions at a landscape some distance from the weather station.
* vane: 풍향계 ** spindle: 회전축




?
As online search becomes easier and speedier, people’s attachment to a text  tends to become more   (A)   ,   and their interest in the whole content (B) .

(A) (B)
① temporary	······	expands
② temporary	······	diminishes
③ intense	······	diminishes
④ intense	······	expands
⑤ complicated	······	persists




8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
	


(C)
(D)









41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Machines That Create Redefine Creativity
② The New Way Machines Learn and Think
③ How Brain Works During Unconsciousness
④ Potential Limits of Artificial Intelligence
⑤ High Technology Weakens Creativity

42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)





43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과  다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Burres 씨는 농작물 수확을 위해 젊은이들을 고용했다.
② Michael은 John보다 더 많은 품삯을 요구했다.
③ Nathan은 점심 식사를 제공받지 못했다.
④ 젊은이들은 수표에 적힌 액수를 보고 약간 어리둥절했다.
⑤ Michael은 일터로 가는 시간을 품삯 계산에 포함했다.


	




제 3 교시

2021학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역






1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학교 정원 관리 봉사자를  모집하려고
② 식물원  체험 학습 일정을 공지하려고
③ 봉사 활동 확인서 신청 방법을 안내하려고
④ 학교 정원에 심을 모종 기부를 부탁하려고
⑤ 정원의 잡초를 제거하는 요령을 설명하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자신의 체력 수준에 맞게 운동 계획을 세우는 것이 좋다.
② 과도한 운동은 심리적 불안정을 초래할 수 있다.
③ 운동 일지 작성이 체력 관리에 도움이 된다.
④ 근력 운동과 유산소 운동을 병행하는 것이 유익하다.
⑤ 운동 중 부상 예방을 위해 적절한 장비를 착용해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 기자  － 농업 연구원	② 콜센터 직원 － 고객
③ 방송  연출가 － 작가	④ 홈 쇼핑 쇼 호스트 － 농부
⑤ 식료품 가게 직원 － 조리사

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.









5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 이미지 검색하기	② 발표 대본 검토하기
③ 면접  예상 질문 만들기	④ 포트폴리오 우편 발송하기
⑤ 발표 연습 영상 촬영하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $30	② $32	③ $35	④ $39	⑤ $40


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 연구 주제를 변경한 이유를 고르시오.
① 관련 데이터를 찾기 어려워서
② 지도 교수를 구하지 못해서
③ 희망하는 진로가 바뀌어서
④ 연구 지원금을 확보하지 못해서
⑤ 다른 학생과 연구 주제가 겹쳐서

8. 대화를 듣고, Mobile Throwing Championship에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
①  최초 개최 연도	② 개최 목적	③ 참가비
④ 우승 상품	⑤ 심사 기준

9. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 휴대용 사진 인화기를 고르시오.
Portable Photo Printers

①
②
③
④
⑤

10. 2021 International Violin Making Competition에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 신청서에 바이올린 사진을 첨부하여 제출해야 한다.
② 5월 1일까지 등록하면 등록비가 할인된다.
③ 바이올린을 우편으로 제출할 수 있다.
④ 유명 바이올린 연주자가 심사 위원에 포함된다.
⑤ 우승자는 10,000유로를 받는다.

11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Why don’t you put off visiting the doctor?
② Let’s ask David if we can reschedule.
③ How about inviting David to our club?
④ I’ll go to the bookstore without you both.
⑤ We should find a place for today’s meeting.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No worries. I’ve already got your file.
② Right. There’s no assignment today.
③ Sorry. Your file has been deleted.
④ Yes. You can send it to me by email.
⑤ Sure. Try downloading it from our website.




2	영어 영역


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’ll find out who directed them for you.
② I’ll give you a list of his best films then.
③ That’s why I prefer watching popular movies.
④ They didn’t leave a lasting impression on me.
⑤ You shouldn’t worry about getting bad reviews.


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I see. I’ll take a break more often to increase concentration.
② Okay. I should avoid playing games during study breaks.
③ Certainly. You’ll enjoy playing mobile games, too.
④ All right. I’d rather study alone to prepare for my exam.
⑤ Interesting. I thought mobile games do more harm than good.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Nancy가 Jake에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Nancy:   	
① We’d rather stay with our original design.
② Why don’t we design the poster by ourselves?
③ Don’t forget to apply for the contest this time.
④ How about going outdoors to take photos for a change?
⑤ We should ask your friends if it’s okay to use their photo.


[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① natural materials traditionally used for skincare
② how to store natural skincare products properly
③ differences in the cultural perception of skincare
④ ways to prevent skin troubles caused by facial masks
⑤ examples of natural substances with harmful properties


17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① India	② Iran	③ Poland
④ China	⑤ Greece


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I’m Maggie Morgan, a long­time fan of the Wakefield Community Theatre. I’m well aware that in this difficult economy, organisations such as the Wakefield Community Theatre are facing financial difficulties and therefore an increase in ticket prices is inevitable. But in my opinion, a
50 percent increase to the price of individual tickets seems totally unreasonable. It would mean that ordinary residents like myself will have fewer opportunities to enjoy a quality drama performance. Pricing tickets out of the range of local residents is not a good option, because it’ll hurt your organisation in years to come. I’m sure there will be other ways to get financial support instead of raising ticket prices so much. I hope to hear from you soon on this matter.
① 공연 관람권 가격 인상률에 이의를 제기하려고
② 지역 주민을 위한 공연장 건립을 제안하려고
③ 자선 연극 공연 개최에 감사하려고
④ 공연 관람료의 단체 할인 가능 여부를 문의하려고
⑤ 공연 취소로 입은 손실에 대해 보상을 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Tavil의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Tavil feels he understands this buried world and he is ready to leave. But when he turns, the hole he’d climbed through no longer exists. In its place is a smooth wall of white tile, a continuation of the unending pattern throughout the tunnel. The broken scraps of debris that had littered the base of the hole are gone as well. And this is when he feels the horrifying truth of where he is: so deep underground that the climb down made the muscles in his legs and arms tremble. He is trapped. Brutally so. As if in a grave, in a tomb. Frightened, he claws at the tiles. He screams, not caring if someone hears; hoping they do and will cast him out.
① bored and lonely	② relieved and hopeful
③ thrilled and joyful	④ terrified and desperate
⑤ touched and grateful
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Your brain doesn’t recognize don’t. No matter what I say, don’t think of a giraffe with brown spots on it. No matter what I say, don’t think of a clear glass vase with fresh red roses in it. What happens? It’s automatic, isn’t it? Your brain goes ahead and creates the picture all by itself. Your words ― whether you think, say, read, or hear them ― are a direct command to create. The more direct the order, the more diligent the response. Trickily, if you say you don’t want to lose your temper, your brain doesn’t recognize don’t and sees it as a royal command to get you to lose your temper. If say you don’t want to spill your drink, it’s as good as an instruction to tip the contents. Change your words to support you. Create affirmations that suit you. Think and say precisely what you desire rather than what you don’t want.
① 원하는 바를 긍정문으로 생각하고 말하라.
② 창의력 향상을 위해 상상하는 연습을 하라.
③ 일상 대화 시 명령조의 말투를 사용하지 마라.
④ 자신이 하고 싶지 않은 일을 남에게 시키지 마라.
⑤ 기대했던 결과가 바로 나오지 않더라도 포기하지 마라.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 innovation is a delicate and vulnerable flower, easily crushed underfoot이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Perhaps the most puzzling aspect of innovation is how unpopular it is, for all the lip service we pay to it. Despite the abundant evidence that it has transformed almost everybody’s lives for the better in innumerable ways, the kneejerk reaction of most people to something new is often worry, sometimes even disgust. Unless it is of obvious use to ourselves, we tend to imagine the bad consequences that might occur far more than the good ones. And we throw obstacles in the way of innovators, on behalf of those with a vested interest in the status quo: investors, managers and employees alike. History shows that innovation is a delicate and vulnerable flower, easily crushed underfoot, but quick to regrow if conditions allow.
* kneejerk: 반사적인 ** status quo: 현 상태
① Innovation comes from the need for solving deficiency.
② Innovative people are usually very sensitive to criticism.
③ Innovation is often faced with disapproval and opposition.
④ A single misstep in planning could ruin innovation entirely.
⑤ Innovative ideas need a series of revision and refinement.





22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The immense improvement in the yield of farming during the twentieth century, as a result of innovations in mechanization, fertilizer, new varieties, pesticides and genetic engineering, has banished famine from the face of the planet almost entirely, and drastically reduced malnutrition, even while the human population has continued to expand. Few predicted this, yet many are concerned that this improvement has come at the expense of nature. In fact the evidence is strong that the opposite is the case. Innovation in food production has spared land and forest from the plough, the cow and the axe on a grand scale by increasing the productivity of the land we do farm. It turns out that this ‘land sparing’ has been much better for biodiversity than land sharing would have been ― by which is meant growing crops at low yields in the hope that abundant wildlife lives in fields alongside crops.
① 친환경 농법이 자연에 해로운 경우도 있다.
② 식량 생산 증가가 인구 증가로 이어지지는 않는다.
③ 생물 다양성이 높아지면서 생태계의 생산성도 높아졌다.
④ 대규모 경작보다 소규모 경작이 농업 생산성에 유리하다.
⑤ 농업 혁신이 식량 생산량을 늘리면서도 자연 훼손을 억제했다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　More recently there have been attempts to argue that unpaid work is work because ‘it is an activity that combines labour with raw materials to produce goods and services with enhanced economic value’. Economists such as Duncan Ironmonger have attempted to impute a dollar value on volunteering to enable its ‘economic’ value to be counted. Yet despite this, unpaid work and volunteering still remain outside the defined economic framework of our capitalist system because capitalism has competition and financial reward as its cornerstones and volunteering does not. Having said that, it has been estimated that volunteering contributes about $42 billion a year to the Australian economy. Although attempts to quantify and qualify the financial importance of volunteering in supporting our economic structures and enhancing our social capital continue to be made, it is slow going. And while volunteering remains outside the GDP, its true value and importance is neglected. Governments continue to pay lip service to the importance of volunteering but ultimately deny it official recognition.
* impute: 귀속시키다
① efforts to utilise volunteering as a business strategy
② mistaken view of identifying volunteering with labour
③ obstacles to our understanding of the capitalist system
④ governmental endeavours to involve volunteers in public service
⑤ lack of appreciation for the economic significance of volunteering

24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Amazingly, many businesses evaluate their customer service strategy by the number of complaints they get. ‘We have very few complaints from our customers, so we don’t need customer service training at the moment.’ I am told this regularly when prospecting for new clients. Either that or, ‘The number of complaints has dramatically decreased this year and we are very pleased, it seems our customer service initiatives are working’. Companies using this type of measure are in denial. Although it is tempting to bury your head in the sand and believe no news is good news, trust me, if customers are not complaining to you, then they are complaining to other people or they are just never using your business again. The concerning thing is that customers who don’t complain there and then increasingly post their views on the Internet and through the social networking sites; they are no longer telling nine or so people but are probably telling thousands!
① Customers May Not Know What’s Best for Them
② Customer Silence Is Not Golden for Your Business
③ Dos and Don’ts of Processing Customer Complaints
④ Customer Service Improvement: No Laughing Matter
⑤ Empathy: A Key to Collecting Meaningful Consumer Feedback




4	영어 영역


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The graph above shows the sales volume of electric vehicles in five selected European countries from 2016 to 2019. ① Between 2016 and 2018, Norway held the highest sales volume of electric vehicles among these countries, but it was outperformed by Germany in 2019. ② The United Kingdom ranked second in sales volume of electric vehicles among the five countries in 2016, but from 2017 to 2019 it ranked third. ③ Germany’s sales volume rose between 2016 and 2019, and its sales volume in 2019 was more than five times that in 2016. ④ Despite its continual sales volume increase since 2016, France recorded the lowest sales volume among these countries in 2019. ⑤ The Netherlands did not record a continuously increasing sales volume between 2016 and 2019, with a drop in 2017 compared to the previous year.


26. Waldemar Haffkine에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Waldemar Haffkine was born on the 16th of March 1860 at Odessa in Russia. He graduated in the Science Faculty of Odessa University in 1884. In 1889, Haffkine went to Paris to work at the Pasteur Institute, and did research to prepare a vaccine against cholera. His initial work on developing a cholera vaccine was successful. After a series of animal trials, in 1892 he tested the cholera vaccine on himself, risking his own life. During the Indian cholera epidemic of 1893, at the invitation of the Government of India he went to Calcutta and introduced his vaccine. After initial criticism by the local medical bodies, it was widely accepted. Haffkine was appointed as the director of the Plague Laboratory in Bombay (now called the Haffkine Institute). After his retirement in 1914, he returned to France and occasionally wrote for medical journals. He revisited Odessa in 1927, but could not adapt to the tremendous changes after the revolution in the country of his birth. He moved to Switzerland in 1928 and remained there for the last two years of his life.
① Pasteur Institute에서 일한 적이 있다.
② 콜레라 백신을 자기 자신에게 시험했다.
③ Calcutta로 가서 자신의 백신을 소개했다.
④ 은퇴 후 의학 저널에 글을 기고하지 않았다.
⑤ 생애 마지막 2년 동안 스위스에 머물렀다.
27. 
2021 Multicultural Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?








Day 1 (July 17)Day 2 (July 18)? Traditional Dress Fashion Show
? Hands-on Craft Making
? Cooking Class (Thai, Jamaican,
Nigerian and more)? Global Music Concert
? Mini Olympics
? Workshops on Cultural
Diversity



① 수익금 전액은 지역 자선 단체에 기부될 것이다.
② 오후 시간대에 진행된다.
③ 둘째 날에 전통 의상 패션쇼가 열린다.
④ 주차 요금은 하루에 5달러이다.
⑤ 날씨 상황에 따라 일부 행사가 취소될 수 있다.


28. The 5th Avila Yoga Summer Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 참가자 연령에 제한이 있다.
② 저녁식사 비용은 참가비에 포함되어 있지 않다.
③ 5명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
④ 초급자를 위한 수업이 20개 있다.
⑤ 참가자는 요가 매트를 가져와야 한다.




영어 영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The idea that people ① selectively expose themselves to news content has been around for a long time, but it is even more important today with the fragmentation of audiences and the proliferation of choices. Selective exposure is a psychological concept that says people seek out information that conforms to their existing belief systems and ② avoid information that challenges those beliefs. In the past when there were few sources of news, people could either expose themselves to mainstream news ? where they would likely see beliefs ③ expressed counter to their own ? or they could avoid news altogether. Now with so many types of news constantly available to a full range of niche audiences, people can easily find a source of news ④ that consistently confirms

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Relatively undeveloped languages have no single word for plants. The lack of a term doesn’t mean they don’t perceive differences, and it doesn’t mean they don’t know the difference between spinach and a cactus; they just lack an all­encompassing term with which to refer to plants. We see cases like this in our own language. For example, English lacks a single basic term to refer to edible mushrooms. We also lack a term for all the people you would have to notify if you were going into the hospital for three weeks. These might include close relatives, friends, your employer, the newspaper delivery person, and anyone you had appointments with during that period. The lack of a term doesn’t mean you don’t understand the concept; it simply means that the

their own personal set of beliefs. This leads to the possibility	 	isn’t reflected in our language. This could

of creating many different small groups of people with each
strongly ⑤ believes they are correct and everyone else is wrong about how the world works.
* fragmentation: 분열 ** proliferation: 급증 *** niche: 틈새







30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

　Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the ① quantity of freight transported between nations was negligible by contemporary standards. For instance, during the Middle Ages, the totality

be because a need for it hasn’t been so pressing that a word needed to be coined. [3점]

① category	② history	③ mood
④ frequency	⑤ preference








32. Psychologists and neuroscientists warn that when we rely on technology to perform tasks such as navigation for us,

of French imports via the Saint­Gothard Passage would not	 	as we become

fill a freight train. The amount of freight transported by the
Venetian fleet, which dominated Mediterranean trade, would not fill a ② modern container ship. The volume, but not the speed, of trade improved under mercantilism, notably for maritime transportation. In spite of all, distribution capacities were very limited and speeds ③ slow. For example, a stagecoach going through the English countryside in the sixteenth century had an average speed of 2 miles per hour; moving one ton of cargo 30 miles inland in the United States by the late eighteenth century was as costly as moving it across the Atlantic. The inland transportation system was thus very ④ limited. By the late eighteenth century, canal systems started to emerge in Europe. They permitted the large movements of bulk freight inland and expanded regional trade. Maritime and riverine transportation were consequently the ⑤ outdated modes of the pre­industrial era.
* fleet: 선단, 배의 무리 ** mercantilism: 중상주의

immersed instead in an abstract, computerized world. Studies show that we tend to place too much faith in the accuracy of information from computer monitors, and to ignore or discount information from our own eyes and ears, an effect that has caused pilots to crash planes and GPS­following tourists to drive into the sea. A team led by the British neuroscientist Hugo Spiers found in 2017 that areas of the brain normally involved in navigation just don’t engage when people use GPS. “When we have technology telling us which way to go,” said Spiers, “these parts of the brain simply don’t respond to the street network. In that sense our brain has switched off its interest in the streets around us.” [3점]

① we analyze information too thoroughly
② our awareness of our physical environment fades
③ our knowledge of the real world is not shared with others
④ our ability to emotionally connect to others is lost
⑤ unskilled manual labor is not appreciated




6	영어 영역


33. The conventional view of what the state should do to foster innovation is simple: it just needs to get out of the way. At best, governments merely facilitate the economic dynamism of the private sector; at worst, their lumbering, heavy­handed, and bureaucratic institutions actively inhibit it. The fast­moving, risk­loving, and pioneering private sector, by contrast, is what really drives the type of innovation that creates economic growth. According to this view, the secret behind Silicon Valley lies in its entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. The state can intervene in the economy ― but only to fix market failures or level the playing field. It can regulate the private sector in order to account for the external costs companies may impose on the public, such as pollution, and it can invest in public goods, such as basic scientific research or the development of drugs with little market potential. It should not, however, 	.  [3점]
* lumbering:  느릿느릿 움직이는

① involve the private sector in shaping economic policies
② directly attempt to create and shape markets
③ regulate companies under any circumstances
④ take market failures into consideration
⑤ let the private sector drive innovation


34. The designer in the Age of Algorithms poses a threat to American jurisprudence because the algorithm is only as good as 	. The person designing the algorithm may be an excellent software engineer, but without the knowledge of all the factors that need to go into an algorithmic process, the engineer could unknowingly produce an algorithm whose decisions are at best incomplete and at worst discriminatory and unfair. Compounding the problem, an algorithm design firm might be under contract to design algorithms for a wide range of uses, from determining which patients awaiting transplants are chosen to receive organs, to which criminals facing sentencing should be given probation or the maximum sentence. That firm is not going to be staffed with subject matter experts who know what questions each algorithm needs to address, what databases the algorithm should use to collect its data, and what pitfalls the algorithm needs to avoid in churning out decisions. [3점]
* jurisprudence: 법체계 ** probation: 집행 유예
*** churn out: 잇달아 내다

① the amount of data that the public can access
② its capacity to teach itself to reach the best decisions
③ its potential to create a lasting profit for the algorithm users
④ the functionality of the hardware the designing company operates
⑤ the designer’s understanding of the intended use of the algorithm
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　While we believe we hold the power to raise our children, the reality is that our children hold the power to raise us into the parents they need us to become. ① For this reason, the parenting experience isn’t one of parent versus child but  of parent with child. ② The road to wholeness sits in our children’s lap, and all we need do is take a seat. ③ As our children show us our way back to our own essence, they become our greatest awakeners. ④ This means that how much we pay attention to awakening our children’s minds can make a difference in their lives. ⑤ If we fail to hold their hand and follow their lead as they guide us through the gateway of increased consciousness, we lose the chance to walk toward our own enlightenment.







[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) During a period of very intense pain, the patient decided to try alternative therapy like putting a magnetic patch on his back. He felt less pain afterward and concluded that the patch worked. But this could just be the result of regression.
(B) Failure to recognize this fact can lead to wrong conclusions about causation. For example, someone might suffer from back pain now and then but nothing seems to solve the problem completely.
(C) If he sought treatment when the pain was very intense, it is quite possible that the pain has already reached its peak and would lessen in any case as part of the natural cycle. Inferring that the patch was effective ignored a relevant alternative explanation.
* subdued: 약화된

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) When we can, our understanding of the relationship between sleep quantity and quality across the animal kingdom will likely explain what currently appears to be an incomprehensible map of sleep­time differences.
(B) In truth, the way quality is commonly assessed in these investigations (degree of unresponsiveness to the outside world and the continuity of sleep) is probably a poor index of the real biological measure of sleep quality: one that we cannot yet obtain in all these species.
(C) That is, species with superior quality of sleep should be able to accomplish all they need in a shorter time, and vice versa. It was a great idea, with the exception that, if anything, we’ve discovered the opposite relationship: those that sleep more have deeper, “higher”­quality sleep.
[3점]

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.



　Whenever you perform a specific action (say, throwing a ball) your brain fires off in a very specific pattern. ( ① ) Interestingly, whenever you imagine yourself performing this same action, your brain fires off in almost the same pattern. ( ② ) This is why mental rehearsal is such a prominent technique in sports training: the brain doesn’t draw a strict distinction between the real and the imagined. ( ③ ) Here’s the best bit: whenever you hear a story about a person performing this same action (throwing a ball) your brain will fire off in almost the same pattern. ( ④ ) But as soon as it’s embedded within a narrative your brain will respond largely as though you were performing the action. ( ⑤ ) This means we do not simply listen to stories ― we experience stories.



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

38.



　Why does the skin on the extremities wrinkle after a bath? And why only the extremities? Despite its appearance, your skin isn’t shrinking after your bath. Actually, it is expanding. ( ① ) The skin on the fingers, palms, toes, and soles wrinkles only after it is soaked with  water.  ( ② ) The stratum corneum ? the thick, dead, rough layer of the skin that protects us from the environment and that makes the skin on our hands and feet tougher and thicker than that on our stomachs or faces ? expands when it soaks up water. ( ③ ) This expansion causes the wrinkling effect. ( ④ ) So why doesn’t the skin on other parts of the body also wrinkle when soaked? ( ⑤ ) One doctor we contacted said that soldiers whose feet are submerged in wet boots for a long period will exhibit wrinkling all over the covered area.
* extremities: 손발 ** submerge: (물에) 잠그다



?


(A) (B)
① escalated	……	favored
② stabilized	……	replaced
③ increased	……	devalued
④ declined	……	alienated
⑤ diminished	……	standardized




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 








(C) 
　Sayers, choking through his tears, said, “You flatter me by giving me this award, but I tell you that I accept this award not for me, but for Brian Piccolo. However, Brian cannot be here tonight. He is too ill. But (c) he is a man who has more courage than any of us here tonight.” Shortly after that memorable night, Brian Piccolo died.
(d) His memory will forever be etched in the heart of Gayle Sayers. Piccolo and Sayers had cultivated more than a superficial, tough­guy relationship. Although tough and competitive men to the core, a true and caring love had developed between these two strong athletes.
* etch: 새기다
(D) 





41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Has Digital Media Pushed Out Printed Media?
② Is Media Doing Good or Harm in Our Modern Society?
③ Realism in Media Is Not Necessarily Based on Real Facts
④ Digital World: Where Any of Us Can Create and Deliver News
⑤ Material Presence: What Differentiates Printed and Digital Media
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)





43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 1967년에 Sayers와 Piccolo는 같은 팀 동료였다.
② Sayers와 Piccolo는 원정 경기 때 같은 방을 썼다.
③ Sayers와 Piccolo는 뉴욕에서 열리는 행사에 함께 참석하려 했다.
④ Piccolo는 Sayers가 상을 받기 전 세상을 떠났다.
⑤ Piccolo는 암 투병 중 우울증을 겪었다.





2021학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 등교 시간 변경을 알리려고
② 학교 매점의 영업 재개를 안내하려고
③ 체육관 신축 공사 일정을 예고하려고
④ 교실 의자와 책상 교체 계획을 공지하려고
⑤ 학교 급식 만족도 조사 참여를 독려하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 등산 전에는 과식을 삼가는 것이 좋다.
② 야생동물에게 먹이를 주지 말아야 한다.
③ 야외 활동은 가족 간의 유대를 돈독히 한다.
④ 산에서 야생동물을 만났을 때는 침착해야 된다.
⑤ 반려동물을 키우는 것은 정서 안정에 도움이 된다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 스타일리스트 － 기상 캐스터	② 연출가 － 극작가
③ 매니저 － 뮤지컬 배우	④ 해군 장교 － 항해사
⑤ 디자이너 － 신문 기자

4. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의 내용과  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 프로젝터와 스크린 챙기기	② 담요 가져오기
③ 영화 선택하기	④ 접이식 의자 구매하기
⑤ 짐을 차에 싣기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $126	② $130	③ $140	④ $144	⑤ $150






7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 송별회 장소를 변경한 이유를 고르시오.
① 참석 인원에 변경 사항이 생겨서
② 예약한 레스토랑의 평이 안 좋아서
③ 모임 장소로 가는 교통편이 불편해서
④ 송별회 주인공이 다른 메뉴를 원해서
⑤ 해산물 알레르기가 있는 동료들이 있어서

8. 대화를 듣고, Run with Your Dog  행사에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적	② 날짜	③ 복장
④ 장소	⑤ 참가비

9. Bluemont Salt Mine의 특별 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10월 10일부터 10월 16일까지 진행된다.
② 가장 깊은 구역에 입장이 허용된다.
③ 사진 촬영이 가능하다.
④ 입장료는 무료이다.
⑤ 방문객들에게 선물을 준다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 크레용 세트를 고르시오.
Crayon Sets


①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think so. I should be fine by then.
② I’m sorry. I forgot to bring my racket.
③ Of course. Keep me posted on his recovery.
④ I’m afraid not. The doctor’s schedule is full today.
⑤ Good idea. Let’s watch the tennis match at my house.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I remember where I left my uniform.
② We can’t participate in P.E. class now.
③ You should hurry before the cafeteria closes.
④ You can leave it with me and I’ll find the owner.
⑤ I hope someone will bring it with your belongings.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① I’ll give it a try. What time shall we meet?
② Not yet. We need to wait for the food to be ready.
③ I don’t know. Do you want me to send the recipe?
④ Absolutely. I’ll stress the importance of education.
⑤ Cheer up. We can relax after our homework is done.


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Not now. It’ll be easier to park there late at night.
② Sounds good. I’m glad to hear that you’ll arrive soon.
③ Sure. I’ll check the app for a spot and make a reservation.
④ One moment. The kids should be back from the  museum.
⑤ No problem. I’ll remove the app for the children’s  safety.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Andrew에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jane:   	
① Make sure everybody is prepared for next week.
② I think you should wear this jacket for the festival.
③ Thank you for keeping all your things in perfect shape.
④ How about choosing just the items that are in a good state?
⑤ Why don’t you buy secondhand items instead of new ones?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① positive effects of plants on insects
② benefits of insects to human beings
③ various methods of insect reproduction
④ relationship between diseases and insects
⑤ ways to prevent insects from damaging crops


17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① honeybees	② grasshoppers	③ silkworms
④ fruit flies	⑤ ladybugs
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Mr. Anderson:
　My name is Sophia Willis, Events Manager of the 2020 Caroline County Art Contest. I am currently looking for a place for this year’s contest exhibition. The Caroline County Art Contest has had over one hundred artworks submitted to us by local artists. For the theme, we wanted artists to explore the natural world of Caroline County. I believe the Garden Caf? Gallery would be a perfect place to host the event, as your gallery is well-known for its beautiful garden. The exhibition is usually held throughout October, and we very much hope that we can rent a space for the exhibition at the Garden Caf? Gallery during this time. I look forward to your response.
Yours sincerely, Sophia Willis
① 출품 작품 전시회에 초대하려고
② 작품 제출 방법의 변경을 안내하려고
③ 출품 작품 전시 장소 대여를 문의하려고
④ 정원 박람회의 변경된 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 지역 예술가들에게 작품 제출을 독려하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Annette의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The day of the Five Mile Fun Walk had arrived. Annette had been waiting for Reiner at the registration point for over an hour. There was still no sign of him. She started thinking that something bad might have happened to him. Getting concerned, she tried calling Reiner’s phone again, but there was no response. At that moment, she heard a voice calling her name. She found Reiner coming toward her. “Thank goodness! What happened?” she asked. He explained that the traffic had been terrible. What was worse, he had left his phone at home. “I’m so sorry,” he said. She started to relax. “I’m fine now. As long as you’re here and safe. Why don’t we go and register?” They headed into the event together.
① worried → relieved	② confident  → nervous
③ calm	→ upset	④ regretful	→ grateful
⑤ bored	→ amazed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Given the right conditions, entrepreneurship can be fully woven into the fabric of campus life, greatly expanding its educational reach. One study showed that, within the workplace, peers influence each other to spot opportunities and act on them: the more entrepreneurs you have working together in an office, the more likely their colleagues will catch the bug. A study of Stanford University alumni found that those “who have varied work and educational backgrounds are much more likely to start their own businesses than those who have focused on one role at work or concentrated in one subject at school.” To cultivate an entrepreneurial culture, colleges and universities need to offer students a broad choice of experiences and wide exposure to different ideas. They are uniquely positioned to do this by combining the resources of academic programming, residential life, student groups, and alumni networks.

* entrepreneur: 기업가 ** alumni: 졸업생
① 훌륭한 기업가가 되기 위해서 관심 있는 한 분야에 집중해야 한다.
② 대학은 학생들이 기업가 정신을 함양하도록 환경을 조성해야 한다.
③ 좋은 직장을 얻기 위해서 학업과 대외 활동에 충실해야 한다.
④ 기업은 대학생들의 다양한 소모임 활동을 적극 지원해야 한다.
⑤ 대학생은 학업 성취를 위하여 경험과 생각의 폭을 넓혀야 한다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 don’t knock the box가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　By expecting what’s likely to happen next, you prepare for the few most likely scenarios so that you don’t have to figure things out while they’re happening. It’s therefore not a surprise when a restaurant server offers you a menu. When she brings you a glass with a clear fluid in it, you don’t have to ask if it’s water. After you eat, you don’t have to figure out why you aren’t hungry anymore. All these things are expected and are therefore not problems to solve. Furthermore, imagine how demanding it would be to always consider all the possible uses for all the familiar objects with which you interact. Should I use my hammer or my telephone to pound in that nail? On a daily basis, functional fixedness is a relief, not a curse. That’s why you shouldn’t even attempt to consider all your options and possibilities. You can’t. If you tried to, then you’d never get anything done. So don’t knock the box. Ironically, although it limits your thinking, it also makes you smart. It helps you to stay one step ahead of reality.
① Deal with a matter based on your habitual expectations.
② Question what you expect from a familiar object.
③ Replace predetermined routines with fresh ones.
④ Think over all possible outcomes of a given situation.
⑤ Extend all the boundaries that guide your thinking to insight.

22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Music is a human art form, an inseparable part of the human experience everywhere in the world. Music is social, and tightly woven into the tapestry of life, and young children are very much a part of this multifaceted fabric. The musical experiences they have provide opportunities for them to know language, behaviors, customs, traditions, beliefs, values, stories, and other cultural nuances. As they become musically skilled through experiences in song and instrumental music, young children can also grow cultural knowledge and sensitivity. Music is an extremely important aspect of culture, shaping and transmitting the above-mentioned aspects that characterize groups of people. Exposing young children to the world’s musical cultures brings them into the cultural conversation, allowing them to learn about self and others in an artistically meaningful and engaging way. Prior to the development of social biases and cultural preferences that all too easily turn into prejudices, the opportunity to know people through song, dance, and instrument play is a gift to all who work for the well-balanced development of young children into the responsible citizens they will one day become.
* tapestry: 색색의 실로 수놓은 장식 걸개 ** multifaceted: 다면의
① 아이들의 균형 잡힌 성장을 위해서는 다양한 경험이 중요하다.
② 사회적 편견과 문화적 선호도는 서로 밀접하게 관련되어 있다.
③ 어린 나이에 다양한 음악에 노출되면 예술적 감각이 향상된다.
④ 음악을 포함한 예술은 특정 문화에 대한 당대의 사회적 시각을 반영한다.
⑤ 음악은 아이들을 사회 문화적으로 균형 잡힌 시민으로 성장하게 해 준다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Conventional wisdom in the West, influenced by philosophers from Plato to Descartes, credits individuals and especially geniuses with creativity and originality. Social and cultural influences and causes are minimized, ignored, or eliminated from consideration at all. Thoughts, original and conventional, are identified with individuals, and the special things that individuals are and do are traced to their genes and their brains. The “trick” here is to recognize that individual humans are social constructions themselves, embodying and reflecting the variety of social and cultural influences they have been exposed to during their lives. Our individuality is not denied, but it is viewed as a product of specific social and cultural experiences. The brain itself is a social thing, influenced structurally and at the level of its connectivities by social environments. The “individual”  is a legal, religious, and political fiction just as the “I” is a grammatical illusion.
① recognition of the social nature inherent in individuality
② ways of filling the gap between individuality and collectivity
③ issues with separating original thoughts from conventional ones
④ acknowledgment of the true individuality embodied in human genes
⑤ necessity of shifting from individualism to interdependence









24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The discovery that man’s knowledge is not, and never has been, perfectly accurate has had a humbling and perhaps a calming effect upon the soul of modern man. The nineteenth century, as we have observed, was the last to believe that the world, as a whole as well as in its parts, could ever be  perfectly known. We realize now that this is, and always was, impossible. We know within limits, not absolutely, even if the limits can usually be adjusted to satisfy our needs. Curiously, from this new level of uncertainty even greater goals emerge and appear to be attainable. Even if we cannot know the world with absolute precision, we can still control it. Even our inherently incomplete knowledge seems to work as powerfully as ever. In short, we may never know precisely how high is the highest mountain, but we continue to be certain that we can   get to the top nevertheless.
① Summits Yet to Be Reached: An Onward Journey to Knowledge
② Over the Mountain: A Single But Giant Step to Success
③ Integrating Parts into a Whole: The Road to Perfection
④ How to Live Together in an Age of Uncertainty
⑤ The Two Faces of a Knowledge-Based Society


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Top 7 Asia-Pacific Destinations (2018)


Rank
DestinationInternational Overnight Arrivals (million)Average Spend per Day (USD)1Bangkok22.8$1842Singapore14.7$2723Kuala Lumpur13.8$1424Tokyo12.9$1965Seoul11.3$1556Osaka10.1$2237Phuket9.9$247　The table above shows the top seven destination cities in the Asia-Pacific region in 2018 by international overnight arrivals, with additional information on the average spend per day in those cities. ① Bangkok was the top destination in the Asia-Pacific region with 22.8 million international overnight arrivals, immediately followed by Singapore with 14.7 million international overnight arrivals. ② Kuala Lumpur was ranked in third place based on the number of international overnight arrivals, and the average spend per day in this city was more than
$150. ③ Tokyo was ranked in fourth place for the number of international overnight arrivals, and the average spend per day in this city was $196. ④ The number of international overnight arrivals in Seoul was larger than that of Osaka. ⑤ Phuket was the only city where the number of international overnight arrivals was less than 10 million, and the average spend per day in this city was
$247.

26. Marc Isambard Brunel에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Marc Isambard Brunel (1769?1849) is best known for the design and construction of the Thames Tunnel. Originally
born in France, Brunel escaped to the United States during the French Revolution. He later moved to London. When the Napoleonic Wars were at their height, he invented  machines for making boots. During the Napoleonic Wars, Brunel’s factory supplied British troops with boots. After the Wars ended, however, the government stopped buying his boots and he went out of business. A few years later, Brunel was imprisoned for several months because of his debt. At that time, London was very much divided by the River Thames   and needed more ways for people and goods to move across it. In 1825, Brunel designed a tunnel under the river. The Thames Tunnel officially opened on 25 March 1843, and Brunel, despite being in ill health, attended the opening ceremony.
① 프랑스 혁명 중에 미국으로 달아났다.
② 부츠를 만드는 기계를 발명하였다.
③ 그의 공장은 영국 군대에 부츠를 공급한 적이 있다.
④ 빚 때문에 감옥에 수감되었다.
⑤ Thames Tunnel  개통식에 아파서 참석하지 못했다.
27. 
Springfield Science Invention Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Springfield Science Invention Contest
　Springfield High School invites all students to participate in the Springfield Science Invention Contest. In this annual contest, you have the opportunity to invent a useful object and show your creativity!
Details
?Judging criteria are creativity and usefulness of the invention.
?Participants must enter in teams of four and can only join
one team.
?Submission is limited to one invention per team.
Prizes
?1st   Place ― $50 gift certificate
?2nd  Place ― $30 gift certificate
?3rd   Place ― $10 gift certificate
Note
?Inventions must be submitted to the science lab by October 1,2020.
For more information, visit www.hsspringfield.edu.

① 매년 개최되는 대회이다.
② 심사 기준은 발명품의 창의성과 유용성이다.
③ 발명품은 한 팀당 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
④ 1등은 50달러 상품권을 받는다.
⑤ 발명품은 과학 실험실로 제출해야 한다.


28. Poetry Writing Basics Workshop에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Poetry Writing Basics Workshop
　Join our Poetry Writing Basics Workshop and meet the poet, Ms. Grace Larson!
All students of George Clarkson University are invited.
When: Thursday, September 24, 2020 (1:00 p.m. ? 4:00 p.m.)
Where: Main Seminar Room, 1st Floor, Student Union
　After an introduction to the basic techniques of poetry writing, you will:
1. Write your own poem.
2. Read it aloud to the other participants.
3. Receive expert feedback from Ms. Larson.
Registration Fee: $10
※ Register on or before September 18 and pay only $7.
　Any related inquiries should be sent via email to studentun@georgeclarkson.edu.

① 목요일 오전에 진행된다.
② 학생회관 3층에서 열린다.
③ 참가자는 자신이 창작한 시를 낭독할 것이다.
④ 9월 18일까지는 등록비가 10달러이다.
⑤ 관련 문의는 이메일로 할 수 없다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Competitive activities can be more than just performance showcases ① which the best is recognized and the rest are overlooked. The provision of timely, constructive feedback to participants on performance ② is an asset that some competitions and contests offer. In a sense, all competitions give feedback. For many, this is restricted to information about whether the participant is an award- or prizewinner. The provision of that type of feedback can be interpreted as shifting the emphasis to demonstrating superior performance but not ③ necessarily excellence. The best competitions promote excellence, not just winning or “beating” others. The emphasis on superiority is what we typically see as ④ fostering a detrimental effect of competition. Performance feedback requires that the program go beyond the “win, place, or show” level of feedback. Information about performance can be very helpful, not only  to the participant who does not win or place but also to those who ⑤ do.
* foster: 조장하다 ** detrimental: 유해한

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. “What’s in a name? That which we call a rose, by any other name would smell as sweet.” This thought of Shakespeare’s points up a difference between roses and, say, paintings. Natural objects, such as roses, are not 	. They are not taken as vehicles of meanings and messages. They belong to no tradition, strictly speaking have no style, and are not understood within a framework of culture and convention. Rather, they are sensed and savored relatively directly, without intellectual mediation, and so what they are called, either individually or collectively, has little bearing on our experience of them. What a work of art is titled, on the other hand, has a significant effect on the aesthetic face it presents and on the qualities we correctly perceive in it. A painting of a rose, by a name other than the one it has, might very well smell different, aesthetically speaking. The painting titled Rose of Summer and an indiscernible painting titled Vermillion Womanhood are physically, but also semantically and aesthetically, distinct objects of art.

* savor: 음미하다 ** indiscernible: 식별하기 어려운
*** semantically: 의미적으로
① changed	② classified	③ preserved
④ controlled	⑤ interpreted








30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　If I say to you, ‘Don’t think of a white bear’, you will find it difficult not to think of a white bear. In this way, ‘thought suppression can actually increase the thoughts one wishes to suppress instead of calming them’. One common example of this is that people on a diet who try not to think about food often begin to think much ① more about food. This process is therefore also known as the rebound effect. The  ② ironic effect seems to be caused by the interplay of two related cognitive processes. This dual-process system involves, first, an intentional operating process, which consciously attempts to locate thoughts ③ unrelated to the suppressed ones. Second, and simultaneously, an unconscious monitoring process tests whether the operating system is functioning effectively. If the monitoring system encounters thoughts inconsistent with the intended ones, it prompts the intentional operating process to ensure that these are replaced by ④ inappropriate thoughts. However, it is argued, the intentional operating system can fail due to increased cognitive load caused by fatigue, stress and emotional factors, and so the monitoring process filters the inappropriate thoughts into consciousness, making  them highly ⑤ accessible.
32. 
Genetic engineering followed by cloning to distribute many identical animals or plants is sometimes seen as a threat to the diversity of nature. However, humans have been replacing diverse natural habitats with artificial monoculture for millennia. Most natural habitats in the advanced nations have already been replaced with some form of artificial environment based on mass production or repetition. The real threat to biodiversity is surely the need to convert ever more of our planet into production zones to feed the ever-increasing human population. The cloning and transgenic alteration of domestic animals makes little difference to the overall situation. Conversely, the renewed interest in genetics has led to a growing awareness that there are many wild plants and animals with interesting or useful genetic properties that could be used for a variety of as-yet-unknown purposes. This has led in turn to a realization that	 because they may harbor tomorrow’s drugs against cancer, malaria, or obesity.
* monoculture: 단일 경작
① ecological systems are genetically programmed
② we should avoid destroying natural ecosystems
③ we need to stop creating genetically modified organisms
④ artificial organisms can survive in natural environments
⑤ living things adapt themselves to their physical environments


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Since human beings are at once both similar and different, they should be treated equally because of both. Such a view, which grounds equality not in human uniformity but in the interplay of uniformity and difference, builds difference into the very concept of equality, breaks the traditional equation of equality with similarity, and is immune to monist distortion. Once the basis of equality changes so does its content. Equality involves equal freedom or opportunity to be different, and treating human beings equally requires us to take into account both their similarities and differences. When the latter are not relevant, equality entails uniform or identical treatment; when they are, it requires differential treatment. Equal rights do not mean identical rights, for individuals with different cultural backgrounds and needs might	 in respect of whatever happens to be the content of their rights. Equality involves not just rejection of irrelevant differences as is commonly argued, but also full recognition of legitimate and relevant ones. [3점]
* monist: 일원론의 ** entail: 내포하다
① require different rights to enjoy equality
② abandon their own freedom for equality
③ welcome the identical perception of inequality
④ accept their place in the social structure more easily
⑤ reject relevant differences to gain full understanding




34. Protopia is a state of becoming, rather than a destination. It is a process. In the protopian mode, things are better today  than they were yesterday, although only a little better. It is incremental improvement or mild progress. The “pro” in protopian stems from the notions of process and progress. This subtle progress is not dramatic, not exciting. It is easy to miss because a protopia generates almost as many new problems as new benefits. The problems of today were caused by yesterday’s technological successes, and the technological solutions to today’s problems will cause the problems of tomorrow. This circular expansion of both problems and solutions 	. Ever since the Enlightenment and the invention of science, we’ve managed to create a tiny bit more than we’ve destroyed each year. But that few percent positive difference is compounded over decades into what we might call civilization. Its benefits never star in movies. [3점]
* incremental: 증가의 ** compound: 조합하다
① conceals the limits of innovations at the present time
② makes it difficult to predict the future with confidence
③ motivates us to quickly achieve a protopian civilization
④ hides a steady accumulation of small net benefits over time
⑤ produces a considerable change in technological successes
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　In a highly commercialized setting such as the  United  States, it is not surprising that many landscapes are seen as commodities. In other words, they are valued because of their market potential. Residents develop an identity in part based  on how the landscape can generate income for the community.
① This process involves more than the conversion of the natural elements into commodities. ② The landscape itself, including the people and their sense of self, takes on the form of a commodity. ③ Landscape protection in the US traditionally focuses on protecting areas of wilderness, typically in mountainous regions. ④ Over time, the landscape identity can evolve into a sort of “logo” that can be used to sell the stories of the landscape. ⑤ Thus, California’s “Wine Country,” Florida’s “Sun Coast,” or South Dakota’s “Badlands” shape how both outsiders and residents perceive a place, and these labels build a set of expectations associated with the culture of those who live there.







[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　In the fifth century B.C.E., the Greek philosopher Protagoras pronounced, “Man is the measure of all things.” In other words, we feel entitled to ask the world, “What good are you?”
(A) Abilities said to “make us human” ― empathy, communication, grief, toolmaking, and so on ― all exist to varying degrees among other minds sharing the world with
us. Animals with backbones (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals) all share the same basic skeleton, organs, nervous systems, hormones, and behaviors.
(B) We assume that we are the world’s standard, that all things should be compared to us. Such an assumption makes us overlook a lot.
(C) Just as different models of automobiles each have an engine, drive train, four wheels, doors, and seats, we  differ mainly in terms of our outside contours and a few internal tweaks. But like naive car buyers, most people   see only animals’ varied exteriors.
* contour: 윤곽, 외형  ** tweak: 조정, 개조
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.




(A) The best archival decisions about art do not focus on territoriality (this object belongs in my institution even though I do not have the resources to care for it) or on questions of monetary value or prestige (this object raises the cultural standing of my institution). The best decisions focus on what evidential value exists and what is best for the item.
(B) But art can also carry aesthetic value, which elevates the job of evaluation into another realm. Aesthetic value and the notion of artistic beauty are important considerations, but they are not what motivates archival preservation in the first instance.
(C) Art can serve as documentary evidence, especially when the items were produced before photography became common. Sketches of soldiers on a battlefield, paintings of English country villages or portraits of Dutch townspeople can provide the only visual evidence of a long-ago place, person or time. [3점]
* archival: 기록(보관소)의  ** prestige: 명성, 위신
*** realm: 영역
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Film  has  no  grammar.  (  ① )  There  are,  however,   some
vaguely defined rules of usage in cinematic language, and the syntax of film ― its systematic arrangement ― orders these rules and indicates relationships among them.  (  ② )  As  with
written and spoken languages, it is important  to  remember that the syntax of film is a result of its usage,  not  a determinant of it. ( ③ ) There is nothing preordained about film syntax. ( ④ ) Like the syntax of written and spoken language, the syntax of film is an organic development, descriptive rather than prescriptive, and it has changed considerably over the years. ( ⑤ ) “Hollywood  Grammar” may sound laughable now, but during the thirties, forties, and early fifties it was an accurate model of the way Hollywood films were constructed. [3점]
* preordained: 미리 정해진

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?



As long as you do not run out of copies before completing this process, you will know that you have a sufficient number to go around.
　We sometimes solve number problems almost without realizing it.  (  ① )  For example, suppose you are conducting  a meeting and you want to ensure that everyone there has a copy of the agenda. ( ② ) You can deal with this by labelling each copy of the handout in turn with the initials of each of those present. ( ③ ) You have then solved this problem  without resorting to arithmetic and without explicit counting.    ( ④ ) There are numbers at work for us here all the same and they allow precise comparison of one collection with another, even though the members that make up the collections could have entirely different characters, as is the case here, where  one set is a collection of people, while the other consists of pieces of paper. ( ⑤ ) What numbers allow us to do is to compare the relative size of one set with another.
* arithmetic: 산수













(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① pursuing …… unnecessary	② pursuing …… common
③ holding  …… personal	④ denying …… ethical
⑤ denying …… primary



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)













(C)
(D) 


41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Building a Wall Between Reality and the Fictive World
② Creative Reading: Going Beyond the Writer’s Intentions
③ Usefulness of Readers’ Experiences for Effective Writing
④ Context in Writing: A Lighthouse for Understanding Texts
⑤ Trapped in Their Own Words: The Narrow Outlook of Authors

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아이들은 할머니의 옥수수 수확을 돕기 위해 모였다.
② Sally는 덥고 짜증나서 옥수수 밭을 떠나고 싶었다.
③ 아이들은 각자 세 번씩 옥수수가 담긴 자루를 곡물창고로 날라야 했다.
④ 할머니는 아이들에게 맛있는 점심을 제공했다.
⑤ Sally는 옥수수가 담긴 무거운 자루를 가지고 집으로 갔다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2022학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 동영상 편집 강좌를 홍보하려고
② 학교 홍보 영상 출연자를 모집하려고
③ 교내 댄스 동아리 가입을 권유하려고
④ 웹 사이트 제작 경연 대회를 안내하려고
⑤ 신입생 환영 행사 아이디어를 공모하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장시간의 컴퓨터 작업은 위장 활동을 저해한다.
② 엎드려 자는 자세는 목에 통증을 유발할 수 있다.
③ 잠자기 전 가벼운 스트레칭은 숙면에 도움을  준다.
④ 올바른 자세를 위해 모니터 높이를 조절해야  한다.
⑤ 잠자는 자세를 보면 그 사람의 성격을 알 수 있다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 소설가 - 편집자	② 환경미화원 - 관광객
③ 기자 - 프로듀서	④ 방송 작가 - 환경 운동가
⑤ 사진작가 - 낚시꾼


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 학생회 자선 행사에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 뮤지컬을 보러 가야 해서
② 병원 진료를 받아야 해서
③ 농구 시합에 출전해야 해서
④ 기말고사 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 자원봉사를 하러 가야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Kimchi Dish Contest에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 경연 과제	② 주최 기관	③ 우승 상금
④ 시작 연도	⑤ 참가 자격

9. Full Day City Tour에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 호텔 투숙객에게 특가로 제공한다.
② 매일 오전 10시에 버스가 출발한다.
③ 여섯 곳의 주요 관광 명소에 들른다.
④ 전문 여행 가이드가 동행한다.
⑤ 점심 식사를 무료로 제공한다.

10.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  남자가  구입할  캔들  워머 램프를 고르시오.


4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르
시오.	①
②
③
④
⑤

Candle Warmer Lamp



1.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m glad to hear you enjoyed your food today.
② We’ve run out of ingredients to make the dish.
③ Thank you for bringing your home?cooked food.
④ I’ll let you know when your seats are available.
⑤ I’ll recommend the special creamy salmon pasta.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 튜브에서 바람 빼기	② 수영복 챙기기
③ 숙박 시설 검색하기	④ 식당 예약하기
⑤ 퇴실 시간 문의하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54	② $60	③ $63	④ $70	⑤ $75


12.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m afraid that I can’t get this stain out.
② Sorry. I’ll take it to the dry cleaner’s now.
③ No way. You should organize the closet today.
④ You should have worn the suit at the presentation.
⑤ Don’t worry. I’m going to pick it up this afternoon.




2	영어 영역


13.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Hurry up. Her birthday is coming soon.
② Sounds great. I’m sure it’ll make her feel better.
③ Sure. You should have bought her another model.
④ No worries. This keyboard is what I want to have.
⑤ A belated happy birthday to you. This gift is for you.


14.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Right. He’s been away from work for five days.
② No problem. I’ll send you an engineer right away.
③ Okay. He’ll call you before he makes the visit tomorrow.
④ Sure. You can use the Internet service anywhere at home.
⑤ Sorry. You need to change your Internet service provider.


15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Sofia가  Hannah에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Sofia:  	
① I think our costume preparation is way behind schedule.
② Please put the leading actor in the middle of the poster.
③ Let’s pick a color that makes the main character noticeable.
④ I’ll recommend someone to take over my position next year.
⑤ More comfortable clothing will be better for the character.


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① tools used to study animal behaviors
② animals that make clever use of tools
③ cooperation  between  humans and animals
④ types of communication between animals
⑤ disadvantages of animals living in the wild


17.언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① crows	② monkeys	③ elephants
④ beavers	⑤ octopuses




18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 신간 도서 출판 기념회에 초대하려고
② 저작물 사용에 대한 허락을 구하려고
③ 개인 정보의 무단 사용에 대해 항의하려고
④ 재난에 적절히 대처하는 요령을 안내하려고
⑤ 재난과 관련한 경험담을 보내 줄 것을 요청하려고

19.다음 글에 나타난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I was going to a conference and my plane was delayed, so by the time I got to my hotel everyone I was supposed to meet had already left for the conference. I walked to the bus stop, but to my dismay the last shuttle to the convention center had already gone. I was at a loss as to what to do! Then a young man standing on the sidewalk said, “The convention center isn’t very far. It’s only four blocks.” So I started walking. It wasn’t long before the convention center appeared in front of my eyes. My heart slowly calmed down! Fortunately, I was just in time for the conference!
① frustrated → relieved	② bored → excited
③ angry → embarrassed	④ envious → ashamed
⑤ doubtful → indifferent

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Bringing incredible creative projects to life demands much hard work down in the trenches of day?to?day idea execution. Genius truly is “1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.” But we cannot forget the flip side of that 99 percent ? it’s impossible to solve every problem by sheer force of will. We must also make time for play, relaxation, and exploration, the essential ingredients of the creative insights that help us evolve existing ideas and set new projects in motion. Often this means creating a routine for breaking from your routine, working on exploratory side projects just for the hell of it, or finding new ways to hotwire your brain’s perspective on a problem. To stay creatively fit, we must keep our minds engaged and on the move ? because the greatest enemy of creativity is nothing more than standing still.
① 창의성을 유지할 다양한 경험과 활동을 지속해야 한다.
② 내적 비판과 성찰을 통해 숨은 잠재력을 일깨워야 한다.
③ 일상에서의 관찰을 통해 새로운 아이디어를 얻어야 한다.
④ 혁신적 아이디어를 내려면 기존 사고의 틀을 버려야 한다.
⑤ 추상적인 생각을 뛰어넘어 구체적인 적용을 모색해야 한다.




영어 영역	3


21.밑줄 친 do  not  have  the ears  to  hear  it이 다음 글에서 의미 하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Far from a synonym for capitalism, consumerism makes capitalism impossible over the long term, since it makes capital formation all but impossible. A consumer culture isn’t a saving culture, isn’t a thrift culture. It’s too fixated on buying the next toy to ever delay gratification, to ever save and invest for the future. The point is elementary: you can’t have sustainable capitalism without capital; you can’t have capital without savings; and you can’t save if you’re running around spending everything you’ve just earned. But the confusion has grown so deep that many people today do not have the ears to hear it. Indeed, the policies of our nation’s central bank seem to reinforce this habit by driving down interest rates to near zero and thereby denying people a material reward ? in the form of interest on their banked savings ? for foregoing consumption.
* fixated: 집착하는 ** gratification: 욕구 충족 *** forego: 단념하다
① disagree with the national policy of lowering interest rates
② ignore the fact that consumerism is a synonym for capitalism
③ believe that consumerism doesn’t really do much for well?being
④ form a false assumption that savings can make nations prosper
⑤ fail  to understand that consumption alone can’t sustain  capitalism






2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Many people say that we should take full advantage of the privileges of the Internet by forever learning more and more. They see no limit to how much information a person ought to consume and never acknowledge the emotional and psychological cost of cramming facts into our brains. If we aren’t using the wealth of available data to make ourselves more productive and useful to society, what’s the point of having it? While access to information is a privilege, it’s also a burden. This is especially true when we treat being well?read as an obligation that can’t be escaped. Constant exposure to upsetting news can be traumatic. An unending flood of information makes it hard to pause and reflect on anything you’ve learned. At some point, even the most voracious of readers needs to pull the plug and stop the constant drip of facts, figures, and meaningless Internet fights. We’re living in an era of information overload ─ and the solution is not to learn more but to step back and consume a smaller amount of data in a more meaningful way.
* voracious: 매우 열심인, 만족을 모르는
① 정보 습득의 양보다 정보의 유의미한 사용이  더 중요하다.
② 인터넷상의 정보를 비판적으로 바라보는 태도가 필요하다.
③ 인터넷 기술의 발전으로 인해 평생 학습이 실현되고 있다.
④ 인터넷을 통한 의사소통은 사회적 갈등을 유발할 수 있다.
⑤ 정보는 받아들이는 사람의 관점에 따라 달리 해석될 수 있다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Most of us make our career choices when we are about eighteen. At eighteen, you have limited experience, very limited skills and most of what you know comes from your parents, your environment and the structured school system you have gone through. You are usually slightly better at some skills because you have spent a bit more time on them. Maybe someone in your environment was good at something and passionate enough to get you interested in spending more time in that area. It is also possible that you might have a specific physical feature ? such as being tall ? that might make you better at certain activities, such as playing basketball. In any case, most people make a decision regarding their career and direction in life based on their limited experiences and biases in their childhood and teenage years. This decision will come to dominate their life for many years to come. No wonder so many get it wrong! It is easier to get it wrong than to get it right, because statistically, there are more wrong ways than right ways.
① social factors that make employment unstable
② useful statistics for making a right career choice
③ reasons that an early career choice can go wrong
④ necessity to find one’s aptitude as early as possible
⑤ how to overcome biases in making one’s career choices





24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In making sense of cave art, anthropologists have turned to surviving hunter?gatherer societies that continue to paint inside caves, particularly the San peoples, who live in communities across a wide region of southern Africa. What began to fascinate anthropologists who studied the San was their detailed imitations of the animals they hunt. The hunters, in some sense, become animals in order to make inferences about how their prey might behave. This spills over into ritual. The San use hyperventilation and rhythmic movement to create states of altered consciousness as part of a shamanistic culture. In the final stage of a trance, Lewis?Williams writes, ‘people sometimes feel themselves to be turning into animals and undergoing other frightening or exalting transformations’. For anthropologist Kim Hill, identifying and observing animals to eat and those to escape might merge into ‘a single process’ that sees animals as having humanlike intentions that ‘can influence and be influenced’.
* hyperventilation: 과호흡  ** trance: 무아지경
*** exalt: 의기양양하게 하다
① Cave Paintings: The Dawn of Human Creativity
② Early Humans’ Communication Through Cave Art
③ Hardships of Early Humans Depicted in Cave Art
④ Shamanistic Culture for Paying Honor to Ancestors
⑤ Animal Imitation Rituals and Understanding Cave Art




4	영어 영역


25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above shows the share of U.S. digital video consumers who watched films/shows from three genres between April 2021 and March 2022. ① “Thriller, Mystery, Crime” was the most watched genre by American adults with the percentage of 47, followed by “Horror” and “Science Fiction & Fantasy,” which accounted for 39% and 35% respectively. ② In the 18-29  age  group, “Horror” was the most watched genre, while “Science Fiction & Fantasy” was the least watched genre.
③ Each of the three genres was watched by more than 35 percent of the consumers in the 30-49 age group. ④ The percentage of people who watched “Science Fiction & Fantasy” in the 30-49 age group was the same as that in the 50-64 age group. ⑤ In the 50-64 age group, the percentage of those who watched “Thriller, Mystery, Crime” was twice as large as the percentage of those who watched “Horror.”


26. Gilbert Stuart에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Gilbert Stuart grew up in the American colony of Rhode Island before the United States was an independent nation. He traveled to Scotland, England, and Ireland to study art. He then returned to America about the time the war for independence broke out, but he returned to Europe once again because the war made his career as an artist difficult. Even so, he didn’t find much success until he came back to the United States in 1795, when he painted a portrait of George Washington. Stuart is called the “father of American portraiture” because he painted pictures of all the famous people of early America. One of his paintings of George Washington was hung in the White House. The image of Washington on the U.S. one?dollar bill came from one of Stuart’s most famous paintings of Washington. In 1824, Stuart suffered a stroke which left him partially paralyzed, but he still continued to paint for two years until his death on July 9, 1828.
① 미술 공부를 위해 스코틀랜드, 잉글랜드, 아일랜드로 갔다.
② 독립 전쟁으로 인해 화가로서 일하는 것이 어려워졌다.
③ 초기 미국의 모든 유명인의 초상화를 그렸다.
④ 그가 그린 초상화가 미국 1달러 지폐에 사용되었다.
⑤ 뇌졸중을 겪은 후 더 이상 그림을 그리지 않았다.
27. 
Glass Bottom Boat Adventure에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 바닥이 유리로 된 보트를 탄다.
② 활동 꾸러미에는 돋보기가 포함된다.
③ 3세 이하 아이는 보트 투어에 참가할 수 없다.
④ 보트는 오전 10시부터 30분마다 출발한다.
⑤ 적어도 보트 출발 20분 전에 도착해야 한다.


28. Annual Car Wash Fundraiser에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 불우 이웃을 돕기 위한 행사이다.
② 토요일 오전에 3시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 대기 장소에서 음료가 무료로 제공된다.
④ 30분 시간대마다 20대의 세차 예약이 가능하다.
⑤ 세차가 끝나면 차주에게 차를 가져다 준다.




영어 영역	5


29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The idea that leaders inherently possess certain physical, intellectual, or personality traits that distinguish them from nonleaders ① was the foundational belief of the trait?based approach to leadership. This approach dominated leadership research from the late 1800s until the mid?1940s and has experienced a resurgence of interest in the last couple of decades. Early trait theorists believed that some individuals are born with the traits that allow ② them to become great leaders. Thus, early research in this area often presented the widely stated argument ③ that “leaders are born, not made.” Also, some of the earliest leadership studies were grounded in what ④ referred to as the “great man” theory because researchers at the time focused on identifying traits of highly visible leaders in history who were typically male and associated with the aristocracy or political or military leadership. In more recent history, numerous authors have acknowledged that there are many enduring qualities, ⑤ whether innate or learned, that contribute to leadership potential. These traits include such things as drive, self-confidence, cognitive ability, conscientiousness, determination, intelligence, and integrity.
* resurgence: 되살아남 ** aristocracy: 귀족







30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은?
　Musical performers and their labor union did not perceive early recordings as a threat to their livelihoods because the recordings were mostly of poor quality. It was not long before musicians began to wonder whether recordings of popular artists or songs would ① undermine the demand for live music. For a time, however, recorded music was too scratchy to pose a serious threat, even though it played in commercial places and offered a few performers a way to
② supplement their income. Additionally, during the early days of recording, radio stations ③ preferred using live musicians on their programs. Sound from live performances was better quality, and stations at this time rarely used recordings. Broadcasters ④ rejected union demands for employment and decent wages, because the alterative use of recordings was even less attractive. They made efforts to employ orchestras, bands, and vocalists to perform on radio programs. There was relative balance between live music and technology in the early innovation stages. With increased ⑤ improvements in electrical recording, however, this balance soon changed.
* alterative: 대체하는

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 31.Much  of  what  we  call  political  risk  is  in  fact  	. This applies to all types of political risks, from civil strife
to expropriations to regulatory changes. Political risk, unlike credit or market or operational risk, can be unsystematic and therefore more difficult to address in classic statistical terms. What is the probability that terrorists will attack the United States again? Unlike earthquakes or hurricanes, political actors constantly adapt to overcome the barriers created by risk managers. When corporations structure foreign investments to mitigate risks of expropriations, through international guarantees or legal contracts, host governments seek out new forms of obstruction, such as creeping expropriation or regulatory discrimination, that are very hard and legally costly to prove. Observation of a risk changes the risk itself. There are ways to mitigate high?impact, low?probability events. But analysis of these risks can be as much art as science. [3점]
* expropriation: 몰수 ** mitigate: 줄이다
① injustice	② uncertainty
③ circularity	④ contradiction
⑤ miscommunication









32.Ecological  health  depends  on  keeping  the  surface  of  the earth rich in humus and minerals so that it can provide a foundation for healthy plant and animal life. The situation is disrupted if the soil loses these raw materials or if
 	. When man goes beneath the surface of the earth and drags out minerals or other compounds that did not evolve as part of this system, then problems follow. The mining of lead and cadmium are examples of this. Petroleum is also a substance that has been dug out of the bowels of the earth and introduced into the surface ecology by man. Though it is formed from plant matter, the highly reduced carbon compounds that result are often toxic to living protoplasm. In some cases this is true of even very tiny amounts, as in the case of “polychlorinated biphenyls,” a petroleum product which can cause cancer.
* humus: 부식토, 부엽토 ** protoplasm: 원형질
① the number of plants on it increases too rapidly
② it stops providing enough nourishment for humans
③ climate change transforms its chemical components
④ alien species prevail and deplete resources around it
⑤ great quantities of contaminants are introduced into it




6	영어 영역


3.Magical thinking, intellectual insecurity, and confirmation bias are all powerful barriers to scientific discovery; they blocked the eyes of generations of astronomers before Copernicus. But as twenty?first?century researchers have discovered, these three barriers can all be destroyed with a simple teaching trick: transporting our brain to an environment outside our own. That environment can be a nature preserve many miles from our home, or a computer?simulated Mars, or any other space that our ego doesn’t associate directly with our health, social status, and material success. In that environment, our ego will be less inclined to take the failure of its predictions personally. Certainly, our ego may feel a little upset that its guesses about the nature preserve or Mars were wrong, but it was never really that invested in the guesses to begin with. Why should it care too much about things that have no bearing on its own fame or well?being? So, in that happy state of apathy, our ego is less likely to get data manipulative, mentally threatened, or magically minded, leaving the rest of our brain free to 	. [3점]
* apathy: 무관심

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Except for grains and sugars, most foods humans eat are perishable. They deteriorate in palatability, spoil, or become unhealthy when stored for long periods. ① Surplus animal and crop harvests, however, can be saved for future use if appropriate methods of preservation are used. ② The major ways of preserving foods are canning, freezing, drying, salting, and smoking. ③ With all methods the aim is to kill or restrict the growth of harmful microbes or their toxins and to slow or inactivate enzymes that cause undesirable changes in food palatability. ④ Palatability is not static: it is always changing, based on the state of the individual, especially in regard to the time of food consumption. ⑤ For further protection during long periods of storage, preserved food is placed either in sterile metal cans or glass jars or frozen in airtight paper or plastic containers.
* palatability: (좋은) 맛 ** enzyme: 효소 *** sterile: 멸균한

① do away with irregularity and seek harmony
② justify errors by reorganizing remaining data
③ build barriers to avoid intellectual insecurity
④ abandon failed hypotheses and venture new ones
⑤ manipulate the surroundings and support existing ideas




34. If you are unconvinced that 	, consider the example of the “flying horse.” Depictions of galloping horses from prehistoric times up until the mid?1800s typically showed horses’ legs splayed while galloping, that is, the front legs reaching far ahead as the hind legs stretched far behind. People just “knew” that’s how horses galloped, and that is how they “saw” them galloping. Cavemen saw them this way, Aristotle saw them this way,  and so did Victorian gentry. But all of that ended when, in 1878, Eadweard Muybridge published a set of twelve pictures he had taken of a galloping horse in the space of less than half a second using twelve cameras hooked to wire triggers. Muybridge’s photos showed clearly that a horse goes completely airborne in the third step of the gallop with its legs collected beneath it, not splayed. It is called  the moment of suspension. Now even kids draw horses galloping this way. [3점]
* gallop: 질주(하다) ** splay: 벌리다 *** gentry: 상류층
① our beliefs influence how we interpret facts
② what we see is an illusion of our past memories
③ even photographs can lead to a wrong visual perception
④ there is no standard by which we can judge good or bad
⑤ we adhere to our intuition in spite of irresistible evidence




[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) That is why we so often have a poor relationship with the future and are either more fearful than we need to be or allow ourselves to hope against all evidence; we worry excessively or not enough; we fail to predict the future or to shape it as much as we are able.
(B) The future, on the other hand, must be imagined in advance and, for that very reason, is always uncertain. Getting along with the future is not an easy task, nor is it one in which instinct prevents us from blunders.
(C) But having this knowledge does not imply that they know what to do with it. People often repress their awareness of the future because thinking about it distorts the comfort of the now, which tends to be more powerful than the future because it is present and because it is certain.
* blunder: 큰 실수
① (A) ­ (C) ­ (B)	② (B) ­ (A) ­ (C)
③ (B) ­ (C) ­ (A)	④ (C) ­ (A) ­ (B)
⑤ (C) ­ (B) ­ (A)




영어 영역	7


37.
　Bipedalism, upright walking, started a chain of enormous evolutionary adjustments. It liberated hominin arms for carrying weapons and for taking food to group sites instead of consuming it on the spot. But bipedalism was necessary to trigger hand dexterity and tool use.

(A) This creates the ability to use each digit independently in the complex manipulations required for tool use. But without bipedalism it would be impossible to use the trunk for leverage in accelerating the hand during toolmaking and tool use.
(B) Hashimoto and co?workers concluded that adaptations underlying tool use evolved independently of those required for human bipedalism because in both humans and monkeys, each finger is represented separately in the primary sensorimotor cortex, just as the fingers are physically separated in the hand.
(C) Bipedalism also freed the mouth and teeth to develop a more complex call system as the prerequisite of language. These developments required larger brains whose energy cost eventually reached three times the level for chimpanzees, accounting for up to one?sixth of the total basal metabolic rate. [3점]
* hominin: 호미닌(인간의 조상으로 분류되는 종족)
** dexterity: (손)재주 *** sensorimotor cortex: 감각 운동 피질
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

39.
Charred bones or even carbon deposits from an ancient campfire can be informative documents to people who know how to read them.

　The evolutionary history of a species or a disease is like any other kind of history. ( ① ) There is no experiment, in the usual sense, that we can do now to decide how long ago our ancestors first started to use fires for cooking or other purposes and what subsequent evolutionary effects that change may have had. ( ② ) History can be investigated only by examining the records it has left. ( ③ ) Likewise, the chemical structure of proteins and DNA may be read to reveal relationships among now strikingly different organisms. ( ④ ) Until a time machine is invented, we will not be able to go back and watch the evolution of major traits, but we can nonetheless reconstruct prehistoric events by the records they left in fossils, carbon traces, structures, and behavioral tendencies, as well as protein and DNA structures. ( ⑤ ) Even when we cannot reconstruct the history of a trait, we can often still be confident that it was shaped by natural selection. [3점]
* charred: (탄화로) 까맣게 된


40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Water molecules circulate through the atmosphere as a result of evaporation. ( ① ) As water molecules rise high up in the atmosphere, they may split up into their constituent chemical elements, hydrogen and oxygen, under the influence of sunlight. ( ② ) Whereas the much heavier oxygen either remains in the atmosphere or is captured on the Earth’s surface, the hydrogen tends to escape into space, because it is so light that Earth’s gravity cannot retain it. ( ③ ) As long as there was little or no free oxygen in the atmosphere that could capture hydrogen before it escaped into the cosmos, this process would have continued unhindered. ( ④ ) As soon as this happened, the free oxygen would have captured most of the free hydrogen by forming water molecules again, thus slowing down the loss of hydrogen. ( ⑤ ) Over the course of time, this process would have helped to retain water on Earth, while it also contributed to the emergence of oxygen in the atmosphere.






?
It is possible  to     (A)      an  individual’s  willingness  to  do  something   by   consistently   providing      (B) for the action for some time and then withholding them.
(A) (B)
① remove	······	rewards
② remove	······	punishments
③ boost	······	explanations
④ evaluate	······	punishments
⑤ boost	······	rewards




8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
(D)







41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Emotion Plays an Active Role in Rational Action
② Why Emotional Choices Bring About Bad Results
③ What Prevents Us from Becoming a Rational Being?
④ Costs or Benefits: Which Is More Important for Us?
⑤ The Further Away from Emotions, the More Peaceful


42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e)  중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과  다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Feynman은 처음 산 라디오를 분해했다.
② 고객은 Feynman의 가장 큰 지지자 중 한 사람이 되었다.
③ Feynman은 고객으로부터 계속 질문을 받았다.
④ Feynman은 라디오를 끄고 방을 나갔다.
⑤ Feynman은 라디오 소음의 원인에 대해 궁금해 했다.






2023학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 놀이공원 운영 시간 연장을 공지하려고
② 새로 생긴 실내 놀이 기구를 홍보하려고
③ 놀이공원 내 공연 장소의 변경을 알리려고
④ 놀이 기구 탑승 시 안전 수칙 준수를 당부하려고
⑤ 야외 놀이 기구의 일시적 운행 중단을 안내하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 온라인 계정 비밀번호는 주기적으로 바꿔야 한다.
② 중요한 비밀번호는 메모해 두어야 한다.
③ 소셜 미디어 사용 시간을 줄여야 한다.
④ 보안 프로그램은 수시로 업데이트해야 한다.
⑤ 소셜 미디어에서 개인 정보 노출에 유의해야 한다.

3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 상대방의 부탁을 거절할 때는 이유를 제시해야 한다.
② 무리한 부탁은 처음부터 거절하는 것이 바람직하다.
③ 부탁을 들어 준 상대방에게 감사 인사를 해야 한다.
④ 친한 사이일수록 예의를 지켜서 부탁하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 부탁을 하기 전에 상대방의 상황을 확인하는 것이 필요하다.

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 후원 업체 구하기	② 행사장 예약하기
③ 등록 현황 파악하기	④ 지역 예술가 섭외하기
⑤ 자원봉사자 모집하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $62	② $65	③ $70	④ $82	⑤ $85



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 학교 정원 음악회에 참가할 수 없는 이유 를 고르시오.
① 아직 손목이 낫지 않아서
② 첼로 대회에 참가해야 해서
③ 첼로 연습을 오랫동안 쉬어서
④ 함께 연주할 사람을 찾지 못해서
⑤ 대학 입학 면접 준비를 해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, 컴퓨터 수업에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 내용	③ 기간
④ 준비물	⑤ 신청 방법

9. Sunnyville Coffee Expo에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월 18일과 19일에 개최될 것이다.
② 티켓당 무료 머그잔을 하나씩 받게 된다.
③ 올해의 주제는 ‘From Bean to Brew’이다.
④ 커피를 생산하는 10개국의 커피를 맛볼 수 있다.
⑤ 일찍 예매하면 할인을 받을 수 있다.

10.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 SIM 카드를 고 르시오.
SIM Cards for Australia


①
②
③
④
⑤


1.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure where they are now.
② My aunt is expecting her baby soon.
③ My aunt and the baby are both in good health.
④ I’m on my way to the hospital for a health checkup.
⑤ I don’t know whether they’ll like the gift and flowers.

12.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Exactly. That’s why I gave up swimming.
② Right. It’s cheaper to buy a monthly pass.
③ Not at all. The pool is warm enough to swim in.
④ I don’t think so. We’re not allowed to dive into the pool.
⑤ Good point. Swimming is an exercise for the whole body.




2	영어 영역



13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry. I can’t go to the lab with you now.
② I totally agree. We should wash vegetables thoroughly.
③ Sure. It’ll be nice to study for the biology exam together.
④ Yeah. Vegetables like broccoli are good for our health.
⑤ Indeed. I can’t wait to do the broccoli cell experiment.



14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① Thanks. Donating books is a way to help those in need.
② My pleasure. My customers will love your books.
③ Me too. Joining the book club is worth it.
④ I’d love to. But we don’t buy old books anymore.
⑤ That’s right. So I’ve ordered those novels for you.



15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Lydia가  Mr.  Robinson에게  할  말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Lydia:  	
① I’d like to enter the brochure competition next time.
② I’m afraid you forgot to put my name on the brochure.
③ I’m deeply disappointed that I didn’t win the competition.
④ You haven’t shown me the first draft of the brochure.
⑤ You should’ve informed me about the competition.



[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the average life expectancy of animals
② similarities between humans and animals
③ animals that stay longer with their mothers
④ independent animals that travel and live alone
⑤ different roles of mothers and fathers in parenting



17.언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① chimpanzees	② elephants	③ kangaroos
④ giraffes	⑤ polar bears





18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We hope this notice finds you in good health and high spirits. We are writing to inform you that a package was delivered to the Rosehill Apartment Complex on October 9th, specifically addressed to your home. However, despite multiple attempts to deliver the package to you, it has remained unclaimed at our front desk for an extended period. As the management office, it is our responsibility to ensure the safekeeping of all delivered items and help deliver them quickly to the right residents. Therefore, we kindly request that you visit the management office during our office hours to claim your package. We genuinely appreciate your cooperation in this matter.
① 관리 사무실 공사 일정을 알리려고
② 배달된 물품을 찾아갈 것을 요청하려고
③ 잘못 찾아간 물품의 반납을 부탁하려고
④ 배달 물품의 도난 방지 조치를 설명하려고
⑤ 관리 사무실 운영 시간 변경을 공지하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I hurried to the bus terminal to return home for Christmas. As soon as I arrived at the terminal, I saw my bus pulling away. I called out and ran after the bus, but it was too late. I felt a wave of disappointment wash over me as I realized that I would have to wait three hours for the next bus. I must have been visibly upset because a woman came over, took my arm, and led me to the street. She called a taxi and gave the driver a five­dollar bill. She told him to take me to the ferry terminal, because the bus made a stop there before heading out onto the highway. She also wished me a Merry Christmas, and all I could do was smile. I couldn’t believe what she had done for me, a complete stranger!
① frustrated → touched	② jealous → proud
③ thrilled → doubtful	④ calm → regretful
⑤ indifferent → sympathetic

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The chemists Hans Ebel, Claus Bliefert, and William Russey note: “It goes without saying that scientists need to be skillful readers. Extensive reading is the principal key  to  expanding one’s knowledge and keeping up with developments in a discipline. However, what is often overlooked here is that scientists are also obliged to be skillful writers. Only the researcher who is competent in the  art  of  written  communication can play an active  and  effective  role  in  contributing to science.” From the perspective of readability, moreover, scientists should always write with a reader­centered mentality; even in the act of writing they must be mindful of the act of reading. It would be beneficial for them to understand how readers read in order to improve their writing.
① 과학자는 독자와 만나는 기회를 자주 가져야 한다.
② 과학자는 독자의 관점에서 글을 쓸 줄 알아야 한다.
③ 과학자는 다양한 의견에 개방적인 태도를 가져야 한다.
④ 과학자는 자기 연구 분야 이외의 책도 많이 읽어야 한다.
⑤ 과학자는 연구 결과가 사회에 미치는 영향을 인식해야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21.밑줄  친  squeeze economies into  a test  tube가  다음  글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Physicians and other natural scientists test their theories using controlled experiments. Macroeconomists, however, have no laboratories and little ability to run economy­wide experiments of any kind. Granted, they can study different economies around the world, but each economy is unique, so comparisons are tricky. Controlled experiments also provide the natural sciences with something seldom available to economists ? the chance, or serendipitous, discovery (such as penicillin). Macroeconomists studying the U.S. economy have only one patient, so they can’t introduce particular policies in a variety of alternative settings. You can’t squeeze economies into a test tube. Cries of “Eureka!” are seldom heard from macroeconomists. An economy consisting of hundreds of millions of individual actors is a complicated thing. As Nobel Prize­winning physicist Murray Gell­Mann once observed, “Think how hard physics would be if particles could think.”
* serendipitous: 우연히 발견하는
① admit economists’ contributions to the natural sciences
② conduct controlled experiments on the economy
③ employ complex economic theories
④ share test results with other scientists
⑤ collect economic data over a long period of time





2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Imagine a movie where nothing but terrible things happen. But, in the end, everything works out. Everything is resolved. A sufficiently happy ending can change the meaning of all the previous events. They can all be viewed as worthwhile, given that ending. Now imagine another movie. A lot of things are happening. They’re all exciting and interesting. But there are a lot of them. Ninety minutes in, you start to worry. “This is a great movie,” you think, “but there are a lot of things going on. I sure hope the filmmaker can pull it all together.” But that doesn’t happen. Instead, the story ends, suddenly, unresolved, or something facile and clich?d occurs. You leave deeply annoyed and unsatisfied ? failing to notice that you were fully engaged and enjoying the movie almost the whole time you were in the theatre. The present can change the past, and the future can change the present.
* facile: 지나치게 단순한 ** clich?d: 상투적인
① 결말에 따라 이전 상황에 대한 인식이 달라진다.
② 익숙하지 않은 이야기는 대중의 사랑을 받기 어렵다.
③ 흥행에 성공한 영화가 항상 작품성이 뛰어난 것은 아니다.
④ 상황에 대한 집단의 평가는 개인의 평가에 영향을 끼친다.
⑤ 같은 영화를 반복적으로 보는 것이 영화에 대한 이해를 높인다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Just as today some jobs are better than others, so would they have been in early societies with their blossoming towns and eventually cities, with some roles more dangerous and some having more plentiful access to food or other resources. The archeological record shows that soon after the appearance of towns, agriculture, and surpluses, some burials start to look different from others. Some individuals are buried with more precious goods (metals, weapons, and maybe even art), some are in group graves and some by themselves, and still others don’t even seem to be buried at all. The bones from the burials start to show us differences as well ? chemical and isotope analyses of teeth and long bones reveal that some members of groups were getting more protein or minerals than others; some have more evidence of diseases and greater physical injuries from their labors. Early on these differences are small, but by 5,000 to 7,000 years ago they are becoming quite pronounced.
* archeological: 고고학의 ** surplus: 잉여물 *** isotope: 동위 원소
① the evidence of social inequality found in ancient burials
② scientific efforts to preserve ancient remains
③ attempts to overcome inequality in history
④ cultural differences in the concept of better jobs
⑤ ancient agricultural methods passed down to the present






24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When you break up with a partner or close friend, the natural response (after having a good cry, obviously) is to blame yourself. You wonder what you did wrong and what you might have done differently. Bonds can help us reach a more balanced perspective; there are some bonds that were simply never meant to last, even if they played an essential role in your evolution to this point. Perhaps the most valuable thing is to know that seeing bonds break doesn’t have to break us. In chemistry, by definition, a change in the atomic bonding is not just the end of one state, but the beginning of another: creating the space for new bonding potential. The same is true for us as humans. It might take a cup of warm milk to reset us and give us comfort after a relationship has broken down. But however many bonds we see come apart, we will always retain one of our most human abilities: to connect afresh, find new friends and love again.
① Relationships: The Older, The Better
② A Break in a Bond: A New Beginning
③ Shared Experiences Make Strong Bonds
④ A Friend in Need, A Friend Indeed
⑤ Two Heads Are Better Than One




4	영어 영역



25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27.2023 Greenfield City Run에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하지 않는 것은?
















　The above graph shows the nap length and the number of nap days per year by age group. ① As people get older, the nap length consistently decreases, but that is not the case with the number of nap days per year. ② The 18 to 24 age group, which has the longest nap length, naps over 30 minutes longer than the 55 and older age group, which has the shortest nap length. ③ As for the number of nap days per year, the 55 and older age group has the most days,
135.7 days, whereas the 25 to 34 age group has the fewest days, 84.8 days. ④ The 35 to 44 age group is ranked third in the nap length, and second in the number of nap days per year. ⑤ The nap length and the number of nap days per year of the 45 to 54 age group are lower than those of the 35 to 44 age group.








26.Ann Bancroft에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Ann Bancroft was born in Minnesota, U.S. Bancroft grew up in rural Minnesota in what she described as a family of risk­takers. Although she struggled with a learning disability, she graduated from St. Paul Academy and became a physical education teacher. Bancroft resigned her teaching position in 1986 in order to participate in the Will Steger International Polar Expedition. The group departed from Ellesmere Island on March 6, and after 56 days, she and five other team members arrived at the North Pole by dogsled. She thus became the first woman to reach the North Pole by sled and on foot. In November 1992, she led three other women on the American Women’s Expedition to Antarctica. It took them 67 days to reach the South Pole on skis and Bancroft became the first woman to have stood at both poles.
① Minnesota의 시골에서 자랐다.
② St. Paul Academy를 졸업하고 체육 교사가 되었다.
③ 1986년에 교직을 그만두었다.
④ Ellesmere섬에서 출발한 지 56일 후에 북극에 도달했다.
⑤ 세 명의 남자 대원과 남극까지 스키를 타고 갔다.














① 집합 시간은 오전 9시이다.
② 2km 종목은 아이들만 참가할 수 있다.
③ 등록은 10월 16일부터 시작된다.
④ 날짜와 상관없이 등록비는 동일하다.
⑤ 야외 자선 바자회가 있다.


28.Bluehill  Apple  Picking에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과  일치하  는 것은?

① 애플파이 먹기 대회가 열릴 예정이다.
② 버스는 오전 8시 15분에 출발한다.
③ 참가비에 식사가 포함되어 있다.
④ 사전 등록은 필요 없다.
⑤ 12세 이하는 성인이 동반해야 한다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Dr. Joseph Bell was a professor of medicine at the University of Edinburgh. His students were amazed by his astonishing powers of observation. He seemed able to determine what patients did for a living, or what illness ① they might have, simply by glancing in their direction. One time he concluded that a patient ② had walked across a golf course on the way to the doctor, simply by looking at his shoes. One of Bell’s students was particularly impressed with his teacher’s abilities. He filled up notebooks with examples of ③ what he called Bell’s “eerie trick of spotting details.” The student eventually went into practice himself outside London. When business was slow he filled his spare moments by writing stories. He took Dr. Bell’s powers of perception, and gave them to a character of his own making ? a character who made the young doctor, Arthur Conan Doyle, ④ famous around the world. And so the professor who made even the most complex diagnosis seem “elementary” ⑤ becoming the inspiration for fiction’s greatest detective, Sherlock Holmes.
* eerie: 오싹한 ** diagnosis: 진단










30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Technology has historically distinguished the way music is produced. In a live jazz concert a bass player can provide the audience with a ten­minute jam session but is ① unable to do so if making a record. Time and space limits on early discs made this liberalized performance style impossible. Often, pieces would be separated into a number of discs leading to a ② lack of continuity. In addition to length, musicians had to take into account how the machinery recorded and absorbed their sound. Especially in the early days of recording, human voices as well as instruments were often distorted once recorded. To prevent such distortion, it was up to the musician to ③ alter the sound to accommodate the recording technology that was just coming into existence. Jazz musicians and orchestras almost molded their works around recording parameters. Many musicians were ④ resistant to the limitations and benefits of technology and created their records accordingly. The recording limitations began to filter into stage performance. Musicians were restricted to three­minute songs in the recording studio and they soon ⑤ kept their songs to that length on stage too.
* jam session: 즉흥 연주 ** mold: (틀에 맞추어) 만들다
*** parameter: 한도, 기준

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. There’s reason to worry that an eyes­on­the­prize mentality could be a mistake. Lots of research shows that we tend to be over­confident about how easy it is to be self­disciplined. This is why so many of us optimistically buy expensive gym memberships when paying per­visit fees would be cheaper, register for online classes we’ll never complete, and purchase
family­size chips on discount to trim our monthly snack budget, only to consume every last crumb in a single sitting. We think “future me” will be able to make good choices, but too often “present me” gives in to temptation. People have a remarkable ability to 	their own failures. Even when we flounder again and again, many of us manage to maintain a rosy optimism about our ability to do better next time rather than learning from our past mistakes. We cling to fresh starts and other reasons to stay upbeat, which may help us get out of bed in the morning but can prevent us from approaching change in the smartest possible way.
* crumb: 부스러기 ** flounder: 실패하다 *** upbeat: 낙관적인
① criticize	② remind	③ ignore
④ detect	⑤ overestimate










32. The way we perceive the colors of the rainbow, and the universe in general, is influenced by the words we use to describe them. This is not limited to visual perception but also applies to smell, taste, touch, our perception of time and countless other human experiences. A wine or Scotch connoisseur, for example, has a much richer vocabulary at their disposal to describe the fullness, finish, flavors and aroma of the drink, which in turn improves their ability to recognize and remember subtle differences of which a non­expert may be
unaware. Similarly, a chef or perfumer has at their disposal labels for flavors and smells that allow them to perceive, differentiate among, prepare and remember subtle variations. The labels that we have at our disposal influence how we see the world around us. Regardless of where you place the limits of linguistic effects on cognition, there is evidence that at least some of the things that we perceive and remember differ depending on 	. [3점]
* connoisseur: (예술품ㆍ음식ㆍ음악의) 감정가 ** cognition: 인식
① where we purchase them
② how expensive they are
③ what labels we use
④ how persuasive ads are
⑤ who makes the products




6	영어 영역



3.A connection with ancestors, especially remote ones, is useful for getting a wide­angled, philosophical view of life. Whereas our immediate ancestors are notably skilled at helping us with the “little pictures,” namely the particular, the trees ? say, a problem with a boss ? our remote ones are best for seeing the “Big Picture,” namely the general, the forest ? say, the meaning of our job. As modern people rush around blowing small problems out of proportion, thus contributing to a global anxiety epidemic, ancestral spirits
have a broader perspective that can 	. When it comes to a trivial problem, for example, they’ll just tell us, “This too will pass.” They appreciate how rapidly and often things change. According to American anthropologist Richard Katz, for instance, Fijians say that from the ancestral viewpoint whatever looks unfortunate may turn out to be fortunate after all: “What may seem to be a horrible outcome ... is seen in another light by the ancestors.” The ancestors, it might be said, keep their heads when everyone around them is losing theirs.
* epidemic: 확산 ** anthropologist: 인류학자
① calm the disquieted soul
② boost cooperation in the community
③ make us stick to the specific details
④ result in a waste of time
⑤ complicate situations





34. One of the criticisms of Stoicism by modern translators and teachers is the amount of repetition. Marcus Aurelius, for example, has been dismissed by academics as not being original because his writing resembles that of other, earlier Stoics. This criticism misses the point. Even before Marcus’s time, Seneca was well aware that there was a lot of borrowing and overlap among the philosophers. That’s because real philosophers weren’t concerned with authorship, but only what worked. More important, they believed that what was
said mattered less than what was done. And this is true now as it was then. You’re welcome to take all of the words of the great philosophers and use them to your own liking (they’re dead;  they don’t  mind).  Feel  free to make adjustments and improvements as you like. Adapt them to the real conditions of the real world. The way to prove that you truly understand what you speak and write, that you truly are original, is to 	. [3점]
* Stoicism: 스토아 철학
① put them into practice
② keep your writings to yourself
③ combine oral and written traditions
④ compare philosophical theories
⑤ avoid borrowing them

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Several common themes were found in the highly creative individuals regarding their early experiences and education. In early childhood their families accorded them a great deal of respect and allowed them to explore on their own and develop a strong sense of personal autonomy. ① There was also a lack of extreme emotional closeness with parents.
② There was little evidence of intensely negative experiences; for example there was, relative to the times in which they lived, very little physical punishment for transgressions. ③ Nor, on the positive side, was there evidence of extremely intense bonds of the sort that can smother independence. ④ There was more competition among brothers and sisters for parental love in nuclear families than in extended families. ⑤ On balance, for those who would grow up to be highly creative, relationships with parents were relatively easy and, in later life, pleasant and friendly rather than intensely intimate.
* autonomy: 자율성 ** transgression: 일탈 *** smother: 억누르다





[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) Take  the  word bridge.  In  German,  bridge  (die  br?cke)  is a feminine noun; in Spanish, bridge (el puente) is a masculine noun. Boroditsky found that when asked to describe a bridge, native German speakers used words like   beautiful,             elegant,               slender.               When    native    Spanish speakers were asked the same question, they used words like strong, sturdy, towering.
(B) According to Stanford University psychology professor Lera Boroditsky, that’s not necessarily so. Focusing on the grammatical gender differences between German and Spanish, Boroditsky’s work indicates that the gender our language assigns to a given noun influences us to subconsciously give that noun characteristics of the grammatical gender.
(C) This worked the other way around as well. The word key is masculine in German and feminine in Spanish. When asked to describe a key, native German speakers used   words   like   jagged,           heavy,           hard,          metal.           Spanish speakers used words like intricate, golden, lovely.
* jagged: 뾰족뾰족한 ** intricate: 정교한
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) You will see that the majority of us are quite ignorant about what lies around us. This is not so puzzling. The most extraordinary fact is that we completely disregard this ignorance.
(B) This is best witnessed in visual illusions, which we perceive with full confidence, as if there were no doubt that we are portraying reality faithfully. One interesting way of discovering this ? in a simple game that can be played at any moment ? is the following.
(C) Whenever you are with another person, ask him or her to close their eyes, and start asking questions about what is nearby ? not very particular details but the most striking elements of the scene. What is the color of the wall? Is there a table in the room? Does that man have a beard? [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.


　How can we help students manage cognitive load as they learn to perform complex tasks? One method that has proved effective in research studies is to support some aspects of a complex task while students perform the entire task. ( ① ) For example, Swelter and Cooper demonstrated this with students learning to solve problems in a variety of quantitative fields from statistics to physics. ( ② ) They found that when students were given typical word problems, it was possible for them to solve the problems without actually learning much. ( ③ ) This is because the problems themselves were sufficiently demanding that students had no cognitive resources available to learn from what they did. ( ④ ) The researchers found this improved students’ performance on subsequent problem solving. ( ⑤ ) This result, called the worked­example effect, is one example of a process called scaffolding, by which instructors temporarily relieve some of the cognitive load so that students can focus on particular dimensions of learning. [3점]
* word problem: 문장제(이야기 형식으로 제시된 문제)
** scaffolding: 발판 놓기



　Utilitarian ethics argues that all action should be directed toward achieving the greatest total amount of happiness for the largest number of people. ( ① ) Utilitarian ethics assumes that all actions can be evaluated in terms of their moral worth, and so the desirability of an action is determined by its resulting hedonistic consequences. ( ② ) This is a consequentialist creed, assuming that the moral value and desirability of an action can be determined from its likely outcomes. ( ③ ) Jeremy Bentham suggested that the value of hedonistic outcomes can be quantitatively assessed, so that the value of consequent pleasure can be derived by multiplying its intensity and its duration. ( ④ ) Higher­quality pleasures are more desirable than lower­quality pleasures. ( ⑤ ) Less sophisticated creatures (like pigs!) have an easier access to the simpler pleasures, but more sophisticated creatures like humans have the capacity to access higher pleasures and should be motivated to seek those.
* utilitarianism: 공리주의 ** hedonistic: 쾌락적인 *** creed: 신조



40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Music has no past; it exists only at the moment when it happens, and no two performances are identical. This is music’s greatest asset because it brings out the essential ‘now’ without implications of a past and a potential future. Thus, Stravinsky pointed out that only through music are we able to ‘realize the present.’ Musical ‘meaning’ cannot be separated from the act of presentation. However, the necessity of present­ing music ? making it present  here and now, without which it will not be music at all ? does not sit easily with a concept of education that rests mainly upon received factual knowledge and which, by tradition, uses the past to make sense of the present. If we want music to have a role in general education, it would seem logical to acknowledge this difference and give prominence to activities that will involve all pupils working directly with music. Yet, in spite of numerous attempts to develop a more musical music curriculum for the majority of school pupils, the emphasis is still on pupils absorbing factual information about music.
?


(A) (B)
① overlooked	······	prioritized
② overlooked	······	restricted
③ dismissed	······	disregarded
④ achieved	······	treasured
⑤ achieved	······	challenged




8	영어 영역


[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
	
(C)
　Martha slowly made her way through the section dedicated to (c) her paintings, examining each piece with a mix of nostalgia and longing. The crowd watched in silence, their hearts touched by Martha’s emotional response. As Martha reached the last painting, she turned to Emily with a bright smile, tears still shining in her eyes. “Emily, you’ve given me back a part of myself that I thought was lost forever,” Martha whispered, (d) her voice shaking with gratitude. “I had forgotten the joy that art once brought me, but you’ve reminded me of its power.”












41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Changing Perspectives on the Domination of Nature
② Science Starts from a Desire for Knowledge
③ Ethics Is Central to Every Discipline
④ Nature in Literature Is Not Real
⑤ Is Going Green Really Green?

42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(D)
　Despite Martha’s initial resistance, Emily persistently reached out to her, sharing stories and expressing genuine interest in (e) her life. Through their conversations, Emily discovered that Martha had once been a famous painter. However, she had lost her passion for art due to personal hardships. Deeply moved by her sorrow, Emily resolved to help revive Martha’s creative spirit. So, she organized an art exhibition in the town’s community center.

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Emily는 호기심이 생겨 Martha와 대화를 시작하게 되었다.
② 미술 전시회에서는 Martha의 작품만 전시했다.
③ 마을 사람들은 Martha의 반응을 보고 마음이 뭉클했다.
④ Martha는 마지막 그림에 이르러 Emily를 향해 미소를 지었다.
⑤ Martha는 개인적인 역경 때문에 미술에 대한 열정을 잃었다.






2023학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 놀이공원 운영 시간 연장을 공지하려고
② 새로 생긴 실내 놀이 기구를 홍보하려고
③ 놀이공원 내 공연 장소의 변경을 알리려고
④ 놀이 기구 탑승 시 안전 수칙 준수를 당부하려고
⑤ 야외 놀이 기구의 일시적 운행 중단을 안내하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 온라인 계정 비밀번호는 주기적으로 바꿔야 한다.
② 중요한 비밀번호는 메모해 두어야 한다.
③ 소셜 미디어 사용 시간을 줄여야 한다.
④ 보안 프로그램은 수시로 업데이트해야 한다.
⑤ 소셜 미디어에서 개인 정보 노출에 유의해야 한다.

3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 상대방의 부탁을 거절할 때는 이유를 제시해야 한다.
② 무리한 부탁은 처음부터 거절하는 것이 바람직하다.
③ 부탁을 들어 준 상대방에게 감사 인사를 해야 한다.
④ 친한 사이일수록 예의를 지켜서 부탁하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 부탁을 하기 전에 상대방의 상황을 확인하는 것이 필요하다.

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 후원 업체 구하기	② 행사장 예약하기
③ 등록 현황 파악하기	④ 지역 예술가 섭외하기
⑤ 자원봉사자 모집하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $62	② $65	③ $70	④ $82	⑤ $85



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 학교 정원 음악회에 참가할 수 없는 이유 를 고르시오.
① 아직 손목이 낫지 않아서
② 첼로 대회에 참가해야 해서
③ 첼로 연습을 오랫동안 쉬어서
④ 함께 연주할 사람을 찾지 못해서
⑤ 대학 입학 면접 준비를 해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, 컴퓨터 수업에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 내용	③ 기간
④ 준비물	⑤ 신청 방법

9. Sunnyville Coffee Expo에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월 18일과 19일에 개최될 것이다.
② 티켓당 무료 머그잔을 하나씩 받게 된다.
③ 올해의 주제는 ‘From Bean to Brew’이다.
④ 커피를 생산하는 10개국의 커피를 맛볼 수 있다.
⑤ 일찍 예매하면 할인을 받을 수 있다.

10.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 SIM 카드를 고 르시오.
SIM Cards for Australia


①
②
③
④
⑤


1.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure where they are now.
② My aunt is expecting her baby soon.
③ My aunt and the baby are both in good health.
④ I’m on my way to the hospital for a health checkup.
⑤ I don’t know whether they’ll like the gift and flowers.

12.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Exactly. That’s why I gave up swimming.
② Right. It’s cheaper to buy a monthly pass.
③ Not at all. The pool is warm enough to swim in.
④ I don’t think so. We’re not allowed to dive into the pool.
⑤ Good point. Swimming is an exercise for the whole body.




2	영어 영역



13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry. I can’t go to the lab with you now.
② I totally agree. We should wash vegetables thoroughly.
③ Sure. It’ll be nice to study for the biology exam together.
④ Yeah. Vegetables like broccoli are good for our health.
⑤ Indeed. I can’t wait to do the broccoli cell experiment.



14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① Thanks. Donating books is a way to help those in need.
② My pleasure. My customers will love your books.
③ Me too. Joining the book club is worth it.
④ I’d love to. But we don’t buy old books anymore.
⑤ That’s right. So I’ve ordered those novels for you.



15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Lydia가  Mr.  Robinson에게  할  말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Lydia:  	
① I’d like to enter the brochure competition next time.
② I’m afraid you forgot to put my name on the brochure.
③ I’m deeply disappointed that I didn’t win the competition.
④ You haven’t shown me the first draft of the brochure.
⑤ You should’ve informed me about the competition.



[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the average life expectancy of animals
② similarities between humans and animals
③ animals that stay longer with their mothers
④ independent animals that travel and live alone
⑤ different roles of mothers and fathers in parenting



17.언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① chimpanzees	② elephants	③ kangaroos
④ giraffes	⑤ polar bears





18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We hope this notice finds you in good health and high spirits. We are writing to inform you that a package was delivered to the Rosehill Apartment Complex on October 9th, specifically addressed to your home. However, despite multiple attempts to deliver the package to you, it has remained unclaimed at our front desk for an extended period. As the management office, it is our responsibility to ensure the safekeeping of all delivered items and help deliver them quickly to the right residents. Therefore, we kindly request that you visit the management office during our office hours to claim your package. We genuinely appreciate your cooperation in this matter.
① 관리 사무실 공사 일정을 알리려고
② 배달된 물품을 찾아갈 것을 요청하려고
③ 잘못 찾아간 물품의 반납을 부탁하려고
④ 배달 물품의 도난 방지 조치를 설명하려고
⑤ 관리 사무실 운영 시간 변경을 공지하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I hurried to the bus terminal to return home for Christmas. As soon as I arrived at the terminal, I saw my bus pulling away. I called out and ran after the bus, but it was too late. I felt a wave of disappointment wash over me as I realized that I would have to wait three hours for the next bus. I must have been visibly upset because a woman came over, took my arm, and led me to the street. She called a taxi and gave the driver a five­dollar bill. She told him to take me to the ferry terminal, because the bus made a stop there before heading out onto the highway. She also wished me a Merry Christmas, and all I could do was smile. I couldn’t believe what she had done for me, a complete stranger!
① frustrated → touched	② jealous → proud
③ thrilled → doubtful	④ calm → regretful
⑤ indifferent → sympathetic

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The chemists Hans Ebel, Claus Bliefert, and William Russey note: “It goes without saying that scientists need to be skillful readers. Extensive reading is the principal key  to  expanding one’s knowledge and keeping up with developments in a discipline. However, what is often overlooked here is that scientists are also obliged to be skillful writers. Only the researcher who is competent in the  art  of  written  communication can play an active  and  effective  role  in  contributing to science.” From the perspective of readability, moreover, scientists should always write with a reader­centered mentality; even in the act of writing they must be mindful of the act of reading. It would be beneficial for them to understand how readers read in order to improve their writing.
① 과학자는 독자와 만나는 기회를 자주 가져야 한다.
② 과학자는 독자의 관점에서 글을 쓸 줄 알아야 한다.
③ 과학자는 다양한 의견에 개방적인 태도를 가져야 한다.
④ 과학자는 자기 연구 분야 이외의 책도 많이 읽어야 한다.
⑤ 과학자는 연구 결과가 사회에 미치는 영향을 인식해야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21.밑줄  친  squeeze economies into  a test  tube가  다음  글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Physicians and other natural scientists test their theories using controlled experiments. Macroeconomists, however, have no laboratories and little ability to run economy­wide experiments of any kind. Granted, they can study different economies around the world, but each economy is unique, so comparisons are tricky. Controlled experiments also provide the natural sciences with something seldom available to economists ? the chance, or serendipitous, discovery (such as penicillin). Macroeconomists studying the U.S. economy have only one patient, so they can’t introduce particular policies in a variety of alternative settings. You can’t squeeze economies into a test tube. Cries of “Eureka!” are seldom heard from macroeconomists. An economy consisting of hundreds of millions of individual actors is a complicated thing. As Nobel Prize­winning physicist Murray Gell­Mann once observed, “Think how hard physics would be if particles could think.”
* serendipitous: 우연히 발견하는
① admit economists’ contributions to the natural sciences
② conduct controlled experiments on the economy
③ employ complex economic theories
④ share test results with other scientists
⑤ collect economic data over a long period of time





2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Imagine a movie where nothing but terrible things happen. But, in the end, everything works out. Everything is resolved. A sufficiently happy ending can change the meaning of all the previous events. They can all be viewed as worthwhile, given that ending. Now imagine another movie. A lot of things are happening. They’re all exciting and interesting. But there are a lot of them. Ninety minutes in, you start to worry. “This is a great movie,” you think, “but there are a lot of things going on. I sure hope the filmmaker can pull it all together.” But that doesn’t happen. Instead, the story ends, suddenly, unresolved, or something facile and clich?d occurs. You leave deeply annoyed and unsatisfied ? failing to notice that you were fully engaged and enjoying the movie almost the whole time you were in the theatre. The present can change the past, and the future can change the present.
* facile: 지나치게 단순한 ** clich?d: 상투적인
① 결말에 따라 이전 상황에 대한 인식이 달라진다.
② 익숙하지 않은 이야기는 대중의 사랑을 받기 어렵다.
③ 흥행에 성공한 영화가 항상 작품성이 뛰어난 것은 아니다.
④ 상황에 대한 집단의 평가는 개인의 평가에 영향을 끼친다.
⑤ 같은 영화를 반복적으로 보는 것이 영화에 대한 이해를 높인다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Just as today some jobs are better than others, so would they have been in early societies with their blossoming towns and eventually cities, with some roles more dangerous and some having more plentiful access to food or other resources. The archeological record shows that soon after the appearance of towns, agriculture, and surpluses, some burials start to look different from others. Some individuals are buried with more precious goods (metals, weapons, and maybe even art), some are in group graves and some by themselves, and still others don’t even seem to be buried at all. The bones from the burials start to show us differences as well ? chemical and isotope analyses of teeth and long bones reveal that some members of groups were getting more protein or minerals than others; some have more evidence of diseases and greater physical injuries from their labors. Early on these differences are small, but by 5,000 to 7,000 years ago they are becoming quite pronounced.
* archeological: 고고학의 ** surplus: 잉여물 *** isotope: 동위 원소
① the evidence of social inequality found in ancient burials
② scientific efforts to preserve ancient remains
③ attempts to overcome inequality in history
④ cultural differences in the concept of better jobs
⑤ ancient agricultural methods passed down to the present






24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When you break up with a partner or close friend, the natural response (after having a good cry, obviously) is to blame yourself. You wonder what you did wrong and what you might have done differently. Bonds can help us reach a more balanced perspective; there are some bonds that were simply never meant to last, even if they played an essential role in your evolution to this point. Perhaps the most valuable thing is to know that seeing bonds break doesn’t have to break us. In chemistry, by definition, a change in the atomic bonding is not just the end of one state, but the beginning of another: creating the space for new bonding potential. The same is true for us as humans. It might take a cup of warm milk to reset us and give us comfort after a relationship has broken down. But however many bonds we see come apart, we will always retain one of our most human abilities: to connect afresh, find new friends and love again.
① Relationships: The Older, The Better
② A Break in a Bond: A New Beginning
③ Shared Experiences Make Strong Bonds
④ A Friend in Need, A Friend Indeed
⑤ Two Heads Are Better Than One




4	영어 영역



25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27.2023 Greenfield City Run에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하지 않는 것은?
















　The above graph shows the nap length and the number of nap days per year by age group. ① As people get older, the nap length consistently decreases, but that is not the case with the number of nap days per year. ② The 18 to 24 age group, which has the longest nap length, naps over 30 minutes longer than the 55 and older age group, which has the shortest nap length. ③ As for the number of nap days per year, the 55 and older age group has the most days,
135.7 days, whereas the 25 to 34 age group has the fewest days, 84.8 days. ④ The 35 to 44 age group is ranked third in the nap length, and second in the number of nap days per year. ⑤ The nap length and the number of nap days per year of the 45 to 54 age group are lower than those of the 35 to 44 age group.








26.Ann Bancroft에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Ann Bancroft was born in Minnesota, U.S. Bancroft grew up in rural Minnesota in what she described as a family of risk­takers. Although she struggled with a learning disability, she graduated from St. Paul Academy and became a physical education teacher. Bancroft resigned her teaching position in 1986 in order to participate in the Will Steger International Polar Expedition. The group departed from Ellesmere Island on March 6, and after 56 days, she and five other team members arrived at the North Pole by dogsled. She thus became the first woman to reach the North Pole by sled and on foot. In November 1992, she led three other women on the American Women’s Expedition to Antarctica. It took them 67 days to reach the South Pole on skis and Bancroft became the first woman to have stood at both poles.
① Minnesota의 시골에서 자랐다.
② St. Paul Academy를 졸업하고 체육 교사가 되었다.
③ 1986년에 교직을 그만두었다.
④ Ellesmere섬에서 출발한 지 56일 후에 북극에 도달했다.
⑤ 세 명의 남자 대원과 남극까지 스키를 타고 갔다.














① 집합 시간은 오전 9시이다.
② 2km 종목은 아이들만 참가할 수 있다.
③ 등록은 10월 16일부터 시작된다.
④ 날짜와 상관없이 등록비는 동일하다.
⑤ 야외 자선 바자회가 있다.


28.Bluehill  Apple  Picking에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과  일치하  는 것은?

① 애플파이 먹기 대회가 열릴 예정이다.
② 버스는 오전 8시 15분에 출발한다.
③ 참가비에 식사가 포함되어 있다.
④ 사전 등록은 필요 없다.
⑤ 12세 이하는 성인이 동반해야 한다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Dr. Joseph Bell was a professor of medicine at the University of Edinburgh. His students were amazed by his astonishing powers of observation. He seemed able to determine what patients did for a living, or what illness ① they might have, simply by glancing in their direction. One time he concluded that a patient ② had walked across a golf course on the way to the doctor, simply by looking at his shoes. One of Bell’s students was particularly impressed with his teacher’s abilities. He filled up notebooks with examples of ③ what he called Bell’s “eerie trick of spotting details.” The student eventually went into practice himself outside London. When business was slow he filled his spare moments by writing stories. He took Dr. Bell’s powers of perception, and gave them to a character of his own making ? a character who made the young doctor, Arthur Conan Doyle, ④ famous around the world. And so the professor who made even the most complex diagnosis seem “elementary” ⑤ becoming the inspiration for fiction’s greatest detective, Sherlock Holmes.
* eerie: 오싹한 ** diagnosis: 진단










30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Technology has historically distinguished the way music is produced. In a live jazz concert a bass player can provide the audience with a ten­minute jam session but is ① unable to do so if making a record. Time and space limits on early discs made this liberalized performance style impossible. Often, pieces would be separated into a number of discs leading to a ② lack of continuity. In addition to length, musicians had to take into account how the machinery recorded and absorbed their sound. Especially in the early days of recording, human voices as well as instruments were often distorted once recorded. To prevent such distortion, it was up to the musician to ③ alter the sound to accommodate the recording technology that was just coming into existence. Jazz musicians and orchestras almost molded their works around recording parameters. Many musicians were ④ resistant to the limitations and benefits of technology and created their records accordingly. The recording limitations began to filter into stage performance. Musicians were restricted to three­minute songs in the recording studio and they soon ⑤ kept their songs to that length on stage too.
* jam session: 즉흥 연주 ** mold: (틀에 맞추어) 만들다
*** parameter: 한도, 기준

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. There’s reason to worry that an eyes­on­the­prize mentality could be a mistake. Lots of research shows that we tend to be over­confident about how easy it is to be self­disciplined. This is why so many of us optimistically buy expensive gym memberships when paying per­visit fees would be cheaper, register for online classes we’ll never complete, and purchase
family­size chips on discount to trim our monthly snack budget, only to consume every last crumb in a single sitting. We think “future me” will be able to make good choices, but too often “present me” gives in to temptation. People have a remarkable ability to 	their own failures. Even when we flounder again and again, many of us manage to maintain a rosy optimism about our ability to do better next time rather than learning from our past mistakes. We cling to fresh starts and other reasons to stay upbeat, which may help us get out of bed in the morning but can prevent us from approaching change in the smartest possible way.
* crumb: 부스러기 ** flounder: 실패하다 *** upbeat: 낙관적인
① criticize	② remind	③ ignore
④ detect	⑤ overestimate










32. The way we perceive the colors of the rainbow, and the universe in general, is influenced by the words we use to describe them. This is not limited to visual perception but also applies to smell, taste, touch, our perception of time and countless other human experiences. A wine or Scotch connoisseur, for example, has a much richer vocabulary at their disposal to describe the fullness, finish, flavors and aroma of the drink, which in turn improves their ability to recognize and remember subtle differences of which a non­expert may be
unaware. Similarly, a chef or perfumer has at their disposal labels for flavors and smells that allow them to perceive, differentiate among, prepare and remember subtle variations. The labels that we have at our disposal influence how we see the world around us. Regardless of where you place the limits of linguistic effects on cognition, there is evidence that at least some of the things that we perceive and remember differ depending on 	. [3점]
* connoisseur: (예술품ㆍ음식ㆍ음악의) 감정가 ** cognition: 인식
① where we purchase them
② how expensive they are
③ what labels we use
④ how persuasive ads are
⑤ who makes the products




6	영어 영역



3.A connection with ancestors, especially remote ones, is useful for getting a wide­angled, philosophical view of life. Whereas our immediate ancestors are notably skilled at helping us with the “little pictures,” namely the particular, the trees ? say, a problem with a boss ? our remote ones are best for seeing the “Big Picture,” namely the general, the forest ? say, the meaning of our job. As modern people rush around blowing small problems out of proportion, thus contributing to a global anxiety epidemic, ancestral spirits
have a broader perspective that can 	. When it comes to a trivial problem, for example, they’ll just tell us, “This too will pass.” They appreciate how rapidly and often things change. According to American anthropologist Richard Katz, for instance, Fijians say that from the ancestral viewpoint whatever looks unfortunate may turn out to be fortunate after all: “What may seem to be a horrible outcome ... is seen in another light by the ancestors.” The ancestors, it might be said, keep their heads when everyone around them is losing theirs.
* epidemic: 확산 ** anthropologist: 인류학자
① calm the disquieted soul
② boost cooperation in the community
③ make us stick to the specific details
④ result in a waste of time
⑤ complicate situations





34. One of the criticisms of Stoicism by modern translators and teachers is the amount of repetition. Marcus Aurelius, for example, has been dismissed by academics as not being original because his writing resembles that of other, earlier Stoics. This criticism misses the point. Even before Marcus’s time, Seneca was well aware that there was a lot of borrowing and overlap among the philosophers. That’s because real philosophers weren’t concerned with authorship, but only what worked. More important, they believed that what was
said mattered less than what was done. And this is true now as it was then. You’re welcome to take all of the words of the great philosophers and use them to your own liking (they’re dead;  they don’t  mind).  Feel  free to make adjustments and improvements as you like. Adapt them to the real conditions of the real world. The way to prove that you truly understand what you speak and write, that you truly are original, is to 	. [3점]
* Stoicism: 스토아 철학
① put them into practice
② keep your writings to yourself
③ combine oral and written traditions
④ compare philosophical theories
⑤ avoid borrowing them

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Several common themes were found in the highly creative individuals regarding their early experiences and education. In early childhood their families accorded them a great deal of respect and allowed them to explore on their own and develop a strong sense of personal autonomy. ① There was also a lack of extreme emotional closeness with parents.
② There was little evidence of intensely negative experiences; for example there was, relative to the times in which they lived, very little physical punishment for transgressions. ③ Nor, on the positive side, was there evidence of extremely intense bonds of the sort that can smother independence. ④ There was more competition among brothers and sisters for parental love in nuclear families than in extended families. ⑤ On balance, for those who would grow up to be highly creative, relationships with parents were relatively easy and, in later life, pleasant and friendly rather than intensely intimate.
* autonomy: 자율성 ** transgression: 일탈 *** smother: 억누르다





[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) Take  the  word bridge.  In  German,  bridge  (die  br?cke)  is a feminine noun; in Spanish, bridge (el puente) is a masculine noun. Boroditsky found that when asked to describe a bridge, native German speakers used words like   beautiful,             elegant,               slender.               When    native    Spanish speakers were asked the same question, they used words like strong, sturdy, towering.
(B) According to Stanford University psychology professor Lera Boroditsky, that’s not necessarily so. Focusing on the grammatical gender differences between German and Spanish, Boroditsky’s work indicates that the gender our language assigns to a given noun influences us to subconsciously give that noun characteristics of the grammatical gender.
(C) This worked the other way around as well. The word key is masculine in German and feminine in Spanish. When asked to describe a key, native German speakers used   words   like   jagged,           heavy,           hard,          metal.           Spanish speakers used words like intricate, golden, lovely.
* jagged: 뾰족뾰족한 ** intricate: 정교한
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) You will see that the majority of us are quite ignorant about what lies around us. This is not so puzzling. The most extraordinary fact is that we completely disregard this ignorance.
(B) This is best witnessed in visual illusions, which we perceive with full confidence, as if there were no doubt that we are portraying reality faithfully. One interesting way of discovering this ? in a simple game that can be played at any moment ? is the following.
(C) Whenever you are with another person, ask him or her to close their eyes, and start asking questions about what is nearby ? not very particular details but the most striking elements of the scene. What is the color of the wall? Is there a table in the room? Does that man have a beard? [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.


　How can we help students manage cognitive load as they learn to perform complex tasks? One method that has proved effective in research studies is to support some aspects of a complex task while students perform the entire task. ( ① ) For example, Swelter and Cooper demonstrated this with students learning to solve problems in a variety of quantitative fields from statistics to physics. ( ② ) They found that when students were given typical word problems, it was possible for them to solve the problems without actually learning much. ( ③ ) This is because the problems themselves were sufficiently demanding that students had no cognitive resources available to learn from what they did. ( ④ ) The researchers found this improved students’ performance on subsequent problem solving. ( ⑤ ) This result, called the worked­example effect, is one example of a process called scaffolding, by which instructors temporarily relieve some of the cognitive load so that students can focus on particular dimensions of learning. [3점]
* word problem: 문장제(이야기 형식으로 제시된 문제)
** scaffolding: 발판 놓기



　Utilitarian ethics argues that all action should be directed toward achieving the greatest total amount of happiness for the largest number of people. ( ① ) Utilitarian ethics assumes that all actions can be evaluated in terms of their moral worth, and so the desirability of an action is determined by its resulting hedonistic consequences. ( ② ) This is a consequentialist creed, assuming that the moral value and desirability of an action can be determined from its likely outcomes. ( ③ ) Jeremy Bentham suggested that the value of hedonistic outcomes can be quantitatively assessed, so that the value of consequent pleasure can be derived by multiplying its intensity and its duration. ( ④ ) Higher­quality pleasures are more desirable than lower­quality pleasures. ( ⑤ ) Less sophisticated creatures (like pigs!) have an easier access to the simpler pleasures, but more sophisticated creatures like humans have the capacity to access higher pleasures and should be motivated to seek those.
* utilitarianism: 공리주의 ** hedonistic: 쾌락적인 *** creed: 신조



40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Music has no past; it exists only at the moment when it happens, and no two performances are identical. This is music’s greatest asset because it brings out the essential ‘now’ without implications of a past and a potential future. Thus, Stravinsky pointed out that only through music are we able to ‘realize the present.’ Musical ‘meaning’ cannot be separated from the act of presentation. However, the necessity of present­ing music ? making it present  here and now, without which it will not be music at all ? does not sit easily with a concept of education that rests mainly upon received factual knowledge and which, by tradition, uses the past to make sense of the present. If we want music to have a role in general education, it would seem logical to acknowledge this difference and give prominence to activities that will involve all pupils working directly with music. Yet, in spite of numerous attempts to develop a more musical music curriculum for the majority of school pupils, the emphasis is still on pupils absorbing factual information about music.
?


(A) (B)
① overlooked	······	prioritized
② overlooked	······	restricted
③ dismissed	······	disregarded
④ achieved	······	treasured
⑤ achieved	······	challenged




8	영어 영역


[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
	
(C)
　Martha slowly made her way through the section dedicated to (c) her paintings, examining each piece with a mix of nostalgia and longing. The crowd watched in silence, their hearts touched by Martha’s emotional response. As Martha reached the last painting, she turned to Emily with a bright smile, tears still shining in her eyes. “Emily, you’ve given me back a part of myself that I thought was lost forever,” Martha whispered, (d) her voice shaking with gratitude. “I had forgotten the joy that art once brought me, but you’ve reminded me of its power.”












41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Changing Perspectives on the Domination of Nature
② Science Starts from a Desire for Knowledge
③ Ethics Is Central to Every Discipline
④ Nature in Literature Is Not Real
⑤ Is Going Green Really Green?

42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(D)
　Despite Martha’s initial resistance, Emily persistently reached out to her, sharing stories and expressing genuine interest in (e) her life. Through their conversations, Emily discovered that Martha had once been a famous painter. However, she had lost her passion for art due to personal hardships. Deeply moved by her sorrow, Emily resolved to help revive Martha’s creative spirit. So, she organized an art exhibition in the town’s community center.

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Emily는 호기심이 생겨 Martha와 대화를 시작하게 되었다.
② 미술 전시회에서는 Martha의 작품만 전시했다.
③ 마을 사람들은 Martha의 반응을 보고 마음이 뭉클했다.
④ Martha는 마지막 그림에 이르러 Emily를 향해 미소를 지었다.
⑤ Martha는 개인적인 역경 때문에 미술에 대한 열정을 잃었다.





















2024학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36	② $40	③ $45	④ $50	⑤ $54




1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수족관 직원 채용 광고를 하려고
② 수족관 내 기념품 상점을 홍보하려고
③ 수족관 내부 사진 촬영 금지를 안내하려고
④ 수족관 물고기에게 먹이를 주지 말 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 수족관 수조의 유리벽을 두드리지 말 것을 요청하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아기용 선물은 깨끗이 소독해야 한다.
② 아기의 체온 유지에 모자가 도움이 된다.
③ 실내에서는 모자를 벗는 것이 바람직하다.
④ 아기의 방은 적절한 온도 유지가 중요하다.
⑤ 에어컨 사용 시 주기적인 환기가 필요하다.

3. 다음을  듣고, 남자가  하는  말의  요지로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 생각을 비울 수 있는 취미가 필요하다.
② 악기 연주는 감수성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 작문 능력 향상에는 생각의 정리가 중요하다.
④ 올바른 자세를 위해 운동을 꾸준히 해야 한다.
⑤ 메시지를 명확하게 전달하는 습관을 길러야 한다.

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청소 업체 예약하기
② 인터넷 설치 신청하기
③ 아들의 새 학교에 연락하기
④ 버릴 의자에 스티커 붙이기
⑤ 이사 업체에 이사 날짜 확인하기
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 독서 모임에 참석하지 못한 이유를 고르시오.
① 고객과의 대화가 계획보다 오래 걸려서
② 아이를 돌봐 줄 사람을 찾지 못해서
③ 공상 과학 장르를 이해하지 못해서
④ 신제품을 온라인에 출시해야 해서
⑤ 모임 날짜를 전달받지 못해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Now-and-Then Tech Showcase에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적	② 시작일	③ 장소
④ 관람 시간	⑤ 입장료

9. Found 211에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① H-rail  기차에서 분실한 물건에 대한 정보를 제공한다.
② 웹사이트 회원이 아니어도 사용할 수 있다.
③ 분실한 물건 발견 시 문자 메시지로 통지한다.
④ 다양한 언어로 외국어 서비스가 제공된다.
⑤ 모바일 앱에서도 사용할 수 있다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 쿠키 커터 세트를 고르시오.
Cookie Cutter Sets

①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I forgot to invite him to my birthday party last week.
② That’s too bad. I’ll let him know the meeting is cancelled.
③ That’s weird. He took all the pictures away with him.
④ Alright. Please say thanks to Mr. Williams for them.
⑤ I’d be happy to. He’ll love to have the pictures.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① What do you mean? The trip was last week.
② I’m sorry to hear that. I hope he’ll get better soon.
③ That’s a relief. I’m glad that he’s doing well in school.
④ Pardon me? I completely forgot the festival tomorrow.
⑤ It’s no big deal. I’ll check the opening day for the festival.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Of course. He’ll be grateful for my valuable tips.
② I hope not. You don’t have enough time to study psychology.
③ Good idea. I can definitely get information on that from him.
④ What a shame! I should’ve invited the former graduates.
⑤ No wonder. They didn’t show up yesterday.



14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① No problem. I can walk him and get some exercise too.
② Certainly. He can help me with my assignment this weekend.
③ Absolutely! You can join me on my business trip tomorrow.
④ Keep it up! You can take care of yourself by working out.
⑤ Not at all. I don’t mind walking you to your house.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Kate가 Professor Lee에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Kate:   	
① Do you mind if I change my topic for the writing contest?
② I was wondering why my presentation was postponed.
③ I’m looking forward to awarding you the first prize.
④ I’m afraid you’re not allowed to attend the ceremony.
⑤ Could I switch my presentation date with another student’s?



[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the communication patterns of insects
② the reasons why insects dry their wings
③ the ways insects protect their eggs in the rain
④ the behavior of various insects on a rainy day
⑤ the significance of insects’ role in the food chain



17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① cockroaches	② beetles	③ mosquitos
④ ants	⑤ flies




18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Custard Valley Park members,
Custard Valley Park’s grand reopening event will be held on June 1st. For this exciting occasion, we are offering free admission to all visitors on the reopening day. There will be a food stand selling ice cream and snacks. We would like to invite you, our valued members, to celebrate this event. Please come and explore the park’s new features such as tennis courts and a flower garden. Just relax and enjoy the beautiful scenery. We are confident that you will love the new changes, and we are looking forward to seeing you soon.
Sincerely, Katherine Carter
Park Management Team
① 공원 재개장 행사에 초대하려고
② 공원 운영 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 공원 이용 규칙 준수를 당부하려고
④ 공원 입장 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 공원 리모델링 사업 계획을 설명하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jennifer의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　While the mechanic worked on her car, Jennifer walked  back and forth in the waiting room. She was deeply concerned about how much it was going to cost to get her car fixed. Her car’s engine had started making noises and kept losing power that morning, and she had heard that replacing an engine could be very expensive. After a few minutes, the mechanic came back into the waiting room. “I’ve got some good news. It was just a dirty spark plug. I already wiped it clean and your car is as good as new.” He handed her the bill and when she checked it, the overall cost of repairs came to less than ten dollars. That was far less than she had expected and she felt at ease,  knowing she could easily afford it.
① worried	→ relieved	② calm	→ terrified
③ bored	→ thrilled	④ excited → scared
⑤ disappointed → indifferent

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Certain hindrances to multifaceted creative activity may lie in premature specialization, i.e., having to choose the direction of education or to focus on developing one ability too early in life. However, development of creative ability in one domain may enhance effectiveness in other domains that require similar skills, and flexible switching between generality and specificity is helpful to productivity in many domains. Excessive specificity may result in information from outside the domain being underestimated and unavailable, which leads to fixedness of thinking, whereas excessive generality causes chaos, vagueness, and shallowness. Both tendencies pose a threat to the transfer of knowledge and skills between domains. What should therefore be optimal for the development of cross-domain creativity is support for young people in taking up creative challenges in a specific domain and coupling it  with encouragement to apply knowledge and skills in, as well as from, other domains, disciplines, and tasks.
① 창의성을 개발하기 위해서는 도전과 실패를 두려워하지 말아야 한다.
② 전문 지식과 기술을 전수하려면 집중적인 투자가 선행되어야 한다.
③ 창의적인 인재를 육성하기 위해 다양한 교육과정을 준비해야 한다.
④ 특정 영역에서 개발된 창의성이 영역 간 활용되도록 장려해야 한다.
⑤ 조기 교육을 통해 특정 분야의 전문가를 지속적으로 양성해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 a stick in the bundle이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Lawyers sometimes describe ownership as a bundle of sticks. This metaphor was introduced about a century ago, and it has dramatically transformed the teaching and practice of law. The metaphor is useful because it helps us see ownership as a grouping of interpersonal rights that can be separated and put back together. When you say It’s  mine in reference to a resource, often that means you own a lot of the sticks that  make up the full bundle: the sell stick, the rent stick, the right to mortgage, license, give away, even destroy the thing. Often, though, we split the sticks up, as for a piece of land: there may be a landowner, a bank with a mortgage, a tenant with a lease, a plumber with a license to enter the land, an oil company with mineral rights. Each of these parties owns a stick in the  bundle.
* mortgage: 저당잡히다 ** tenant: 임차인
① a legal obligation to develop the resource
② a priority to legally claim the real estate
③ a right to use one aspect of the property
④ a building to be shared equally by tenants
⑤ a piece of land nobody can claim as their own





22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When it comes to the Internet, it just pays to be a little paranoid (but not a lot). Given the level of anonymity with all that resides on the Internet, it’s sensible to question the validity of any data that you may receive. Typically it’s to our natural instinct when we meet someone coming down a sidewalk to place yourself in some manner of protective position, especially when they introduce themselves as having known you, much to your surprise. By design, we set up challenges in which the individual must validate how they know us by presenting scenarios, names or acquaintances, or evidence by which to validate (that is, photographs). Once we have  received that information and it has gone through a cognitive validation, we accept that person as more trustworthy. All this happens in a matter of minutes but is a natural defense mechanism that we perform in the real world. However, in the virtual world, we have a tendency to be less defensive, as there appears to be no physical threat to our well-being.
* paranoid: 편집성의 ** anonymity: 익명
① 가상 세계 특유의 익명성 때문에 표현의 자유가 남용되기도 한다.
② 인터넷 정보의 신뢰도를 검증하는 기술은 점진적으로 향상되고 있다.
③ 가상 세계에서는 현실 세계와 달리 자유로운 정보 공유가 가능하다.
④ 안전한 인터넷 환경 구축을 위해 보안 프로그램을 설치하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 방어 기제가 덜 작동하는 가상 세계에서는 신중한 정보 검증이 중요하다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　There are pressures within the museum that cause it to emphasise what happens in the galleries over the activities that take place in its unseen zones. In an era when museums are forced to increase their earnings, they often focus their  energies on modernising their galleries or mounting temporary exhibitions to bring more and more audiences through  the door. In other words, as museums struggle to survive in a competitive economy, their budgets often prioritise those parts of themselves that are consumable: infotainment in the galleries, goods and services in the cafes and the shops. The unlit, unglamorous storerooms, if they are ever discussed, are at best presented as service areas that process objects for the exhibition halls. And at worst, as museums pour more and more resources into their publicly visible faces, the spaces of storage  may even suffer, their modernisation being kept on hold or being given less and less space to house the expanding collections and serve their complex conservation needs.
① importance of prioritising museums’ exhibition spaces
② benefits of diverse activities in museums for audiences
③ necessity of expanding storerooms for displaying objects
④ consequences of profit-oriented management of museums
⑤ ways to increase museums’ commitment to the public good

24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Hyper-mobility ― the notion that more travel at faster  speeds covering longer distances generates greater economic success ― seems to be a distinguishing feature of urban areas, where more than half of the world’s population currently reside. By 2005, approximately 7.5 billion trips were made each day in cities worldwide. In 2050, there may be three to four times as many passenger-kilometres travelled as in the year 2000, infrastructure and energy prices permitting. Freight movement could also rise more than threefold during the same period. Mobility flows have become a key dynamic of urbanization, with the associated infrastructure invariably constituting the backbone of urban form. Yet, despite the increasing level of urban mobility worldwide, access to places, activities and services has become increasingly difficult. Not only is it less convenient ― in terms of time, cost and comfort ― to access locations in cities, but the very process of moving around in cities generates a number of negative externalities. Accordingly, many of the world’s cities face an unprecedented accessibility crisis, and are characterized by unsustainable mobility systems.
* freight: 화물
① Is Hyper-mobility Always Good for Cities?
② Accessibility: A Guide to a Web of Urban Areas
③ A Long and Winding Road to Economic Success
④ Inevitable Regional Conflicts from Hyper-mobility
⑤ Infrastructure: An Essential Element of Hyper-mobility


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. 2023 Cierra Basketball Day Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

















　The above graph shows the share of the EU-28 population participating in tourism in 2017 by age group and destination category. ① The share of people in the No Trips category was over 30% in each of the five age groups. ② The percentage of people in the Outbound Trips Only category was higher in the 25?34 age group than in the 35?44 age group. ③ In the 35?44 age group, the percentage of people in the Domestic  Trips Only category was 34.2%. ④ The percentage of people in the Domestic & Outbound Trips category was lower in the 45?54 age group than in the 55?64 age group. ⑤ In the 65 or over age group, the percentage of people in the No Trips category was more than 50%.



26. Jean Renoir에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Jean Renoir (1894?1979), a French film director, was born in Paris, France. He was the son of the famous painter Pierre-Auguste Renoir. He and the rest of the Renoir family
were the models of many of his father’s paintings. At the outbreak of World War I, Jean Renoir was serving in  the French army but was wounded in the leg. In  1937, he made  La Grande Illusion, one of his better-known films. It was enormously successful but was not allowed to show in Germany. During World War II, when the Nazis invaded France in 1940, he went to Hollywood in the United States and continued his career there. He was awarded numerous honors and awards throughout his career, including the Academy Honorary Award in 1975 for his lifetime achievements in the film industry. Overall, Jean Renoir’s influence as a film-maker and artist endures.
① 유명 화가의 아들이었다.
② 제1차 세계대전이 발발했을 때 프랑스 군에 복무 중이었다.
③ La Grande Illusion을 1937년에 만들었다.
④ 제2차 세계대전 내내 프랑스에 머물렀다.
⑤ Academy Honorary Award를 수상하였다.

2023 Cierra Basketball Day Camp
　Cierra Basketball Day Camp provides opportunities for teens to get healthy and have fun. Come and learn a variety of skills from the experts!
Site & Dates
?Cierra Sports Center
?July 17th?July 21st
Ages & Level: 13?18 years, for beginners only
Camp Activities
?Skill Drills: 1:00 p.m.?2:00 p.m.
?Team Games: 2:30 p.m.?3:30 p.m.
?Free Throw Shooting Contests: 4:00 p.m.?5:00 p.m.
Registration & Cost
?Register online at www.crrbbcamp.com.
?$40 (Full payment is required when registering.)
※ A towel will be provided for free.
① 전문가들로부터 다양한 기술을 배울 수 있다.
② 초급자만을 대상으로 한다.
③ 팀 경기는 오후 1시에 시작한다.
④ 온라인으로 등록할 수 있다.
⑤ 수건이 무료로 제공될 것이다.

28. Creative Art Class for Kids에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Creative Art Class for Kids
　Want to encourage your child’s artistic talent? Color World Art Center is going to have art classes for kids from June 1st to August 31st.
Class Programs & Schedule
Clay Arts: Ages 4?6, Every Monday
Cartoon Drawing: Ages 7?9, Every Thursday
Watercolors: Ages 10?12, Every Friday
Class Time: 4 p.m.?6 p.m.
Monthly Fee
$30 per child (snacks included)
Family discounts are available (10% discount for each child).
Notes
Only 10 kids are allowed per class.
Kids should wear clothes that they don’t mind getting dirty.
※ Sign up at Color World Art Center.

① 6월부터 9월까지 진행된다.
② 만화 그리기 강좌가 월요일마다 있다.
③ 모든 강좌는 오전에 열린다.
④ 월 수강료에 간식이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 강좌당 수강 아동 수에 제한이 없다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Consider The Wizard of Oz as a psychological study of motivation. Dorothy and her three friends work hard to get to the Emerald City, overcoming barriers, persisting against all adversaries. They do so because they expect the  Wizard  to give ① them what they are missing. Instead, the wonderful (and wise) Wizard makes them aware that they, not he, always had the power ② to fulfill their wishes. For Dorothy, home is not a place but a feeling of security, of comfort with people she loves; it is wherever her heart is. The courage the Lion wants, the intelligence the Scarecrow longs for, and the emotions the Tin Man dreams of ③ being attributes they already possess. They need to think about these attributes not as internal conditions but as positive ways ④ in which they are already relating to others. After all, didn’t they demonstrate those qualities on the journey to Oz, a journey ⑤ motivated by little more than an expectation, an idea about the future likelihood of getting something they wanted?
* adversary: 적(상대)



30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　To the extent that an agent relies on the prior knowledge of its designer rather than on its own percepts, we say that the agent lacks autonomy. A rational agent should be autonomous ―
it should learn what it can to (A) compensate / prepare for partial or incorrect prior knowledge. For example, a vacuum-cleaning agent that learns to foresee where and when additional dirt will appear will do better than one that does not. As a practical matter, one seldom requires complete autonomy from the start: when the agent has had little or no experience,
it would have to act (B) purposefully / randomly unless the designer gave some assistance. So, just as evolution provides animals with enough built-in reflexes to survive long enough  to learn for themselves, it would be reasonable to provide an artificial intelligent agent with some initial  knowledge  as  well as an ability to learn. After sufficient experience of its environment,  the  behavior  of  a  rational  agent  can  become
effectively (C) independent / protective of its prior knowledge. Hence, the incorporation of learning allows one to design a single rational agent that will succeed in a vast variety of environments.
(A) (B)	(C)
① compensate   …… randomly        …… protective
② compensate   …… purposefully   …… protective
③ prepare          …… randomly        …… protective
④ compensate   …… randomly        …… independent
⑤ prepare          …… purposefully   …… independent

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. People have always needed to eat, and they always will. Rising emphasis on self-expression values does not put an end to material desires. But prevailing economic orientations are gradually being reshaped. People who work in the knowledge sector continue to seek high salaries, but they place equal or greater emphasis on doing stimulating work and being able to follow their own time schedules. Consumption is becoming progressively less determined by the need for sustenance and the practical use of the goods consumed. People still eat, but a growing  component  of   food’s   value   is   determined   by  its 		aspects. People pay a premium to eat exotic cuisines that provide an interesting experience or that symbolize a distinctive life-style. The publics of postindustrial societies place growing emphasis on “political consumerism,” such as boycotting goods whose production violates ecological or ethical standards. Consumption is less and less a matter of sustenance and more and more a question of life-style ― and choice.
* prevail: 우세하다 ** cuisine: 요리
① quantitative
② nonmaterial
③ nutritional
④ invariable
⑤ economic







32. In labor-sharing groups, people contribute labor to other people on a regular basis (for seasonal agricultural work such as harvesting) or on an irregular basis (in the event of a crisis such as the need to rebuild a barn damaged by fire). Labor sharing groups are part of what has been called a “moral economy” since no one keeps formal records on how much any family puts in or takes out. Instead, accounting is 	. The group has a sense of moral community based on years of trust and sharing. In a certain community of North America, labor sharing is a major economic factor of social cohesion. When a family needs a new barn or faces repair work that requires group labor, a barn-raising party is called. Many families show up to help. Adult men  provide  manual labor, and adult women provide food for the event. Later, when another family needs help, they call on the same people.
* cohesion: 응집성
① legally established
② regularly reported
③ socially regulated
④ manually calculated
⑤ carefully documented


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Whatever their differences, scientists and artists begin with the same question: can you and I see the same thing the same way? If so, how? The scientific thinker looks for features of the thing that can be stripped of subjectivity ― ideally, those aspects that can be quantified and whose values will thus never change from one observer to the next. In this way, he arrives at a reality independent of all observers. The artist, on the other hand, relies on the strength of her artistry to effect a marriage between her own subjectivity and that of her readers. To a scientific thinker, this must sound like magical thinking: you’re saying you will imagine something so hard it’ll pop into someone else’s head exactly the way you envision it? The artist has sought the opposite of the scientist’s observer-independent reality. She creates a reality dependent upon observers, indeed  a reality in which 	in order for it to exist at all. [3점]
① human beings must participate
② objectivity should be maintained
③ science and art need to harmonize
④ readers remain distanced from the arts
⑤ she is disengaged from her own subjectivity











34. One of the common themes of the Western philosophical tradition is the distinction between sensual perceptions and rational knowledge. Since Plato, the supremacy of rational reason is based on the assertion that it is able to extract true knowledge from experience. As the discussion in the Republic helps to explain, perceptions are inherently unreliable and misleading because the senses are subject to errors and illusions. Only the rational discourse has the tools to overcome illusions and to point towards true knowledge. For instance, perception suggests that a figure in the distance is smaller than it really is. Yet, the application of logical reasoning will reveal that the figure only appears small because it obeys the laws of geometrical perspective. Nevertheless, even after the perspectival correction is applied and reason concludes that perception is misleading, the figure still appears small, and the truth of the matter is revealed 	. [3점]
* discourse: 담화 ** geometrical: 기하학의
① as the outcome of blindly following sensual experience
② by moving away from the idea of perfect representation
③ beyond the limit of where rational knowledge can approach
④ through a variety of experiences rather than logical reasoning
⑤ not in the perception of the figure but in its rational representation
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Interestingly, experts do not suffer as much as beginners when performing complex tasks or combining multiple tasks. Because experts have extensive practice within a limited domain, the key component skills in their domain tend to be highly practiced and more automated. ① Each of these highly practiced skills then demands relatively few cognitive resources, effectively lowering the total cognitive load that experts experience. ② Thus, experts can perform complex tasks and combine multiple tasks relatively easily. ③ Furthermore, beginners are excellent at processing the  tasks  when  the  tasks are divided and isolated. ④ This is not because they necessarily have more cognitive resources than beginners; rather, because of the high level of fluency they have achieved in performing key skills, they can do more with what they have. ⑤ Beginners, on the other hand, have not achieved the same degree of fluency and automaticity in each of the component skills, and thus they struggle to combine skills that experts combine with relative ease and efficiency.




[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　The growing complexity of computer software has direct implications for our global safety and security, particularly as the physical objects upon which we depend ― things like cars, airplanes, bridges, tunnels, and implantable medical devices ― transform themselves into computer code.
(A) As all this code grows in size and complexity, so too do the number of errors and software bugs. According to a study by Carnegie Mellon University, commercial software typically has twenty to thirty bugs for every  thousand lines of code ― 50 million lines of code means 1 million to 1.5 million potential errors to be exploited.
(B) This is the basis for all malware attacks that take advantage of these computer bugs to get the code to do something it was not originally intended to do. As computer code grows more elaborate, software bugs flourish and security suffers, with increasing consequences for society at large.
(C) Physical things are increasingly becoming information technologies. Cars are “computers we ride in,” and airplanes are nothing more than “flying Solaris boxes attached to bucketfuls of industrial control systems.”
* exploit: 활용하다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) Maybe our brief loss of face benefits the long-term cohesion of the group. Interestingly, if someone blushes after making a social mistake, they are viewed in a more favourable light than those who don’t blush.
(B) If we feel awkward, embarrassed or ashamed when we are alone, we don’t blush; it seems to be caused by our concern about what others are thinking of us. Studies have confirmed that simply being told you are blushing brings  it on. We feel as though others can see through our skin and into our mind.
(C) However, while we sometimes want to disappear when   we involuntarily go bright red, psychologists argue that blushing actually serves a positive social purpose. When we blush, it’s a signal to others that we recognize that a social norm has been broken; it is an apology for a faux pas. [3점]
* faux pas: 실수
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
When trees grow together, nutrients and water can be optimally divided among them all so that each tree can grow into the best tree it can  be. If you  “help” individual trees  by getting rid of their supposed competition, the remaining trees are bereft. They send messages out to their neighbors unsuccessfully, because nothing remains but stumps. Every  tree now grows on its  own, giving  rise  to  great differences in productivity. (  ① )  Some  individuals  photosynthesize like mad until sugar positively bubbles along their  trunk.  ( ② ) This is because a tree can be only as  strong  as  the forest that surrounds it. ( ③ ) And there are now a  lot  of losers in the forest. ( ④ ) Weaker members, who would once have been supported by the stronger ones, suddenly fall  behind. ( ⑤ ) Whether the reason for their decline is their location and lack of nutrients, a passing sickness, or genetic makeup, they now fall prey to insects and fungi. [3점]
* bereft: 잃은 ** stump: 그루터기 *** photosynthesize: 광합성하다

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　As particular practices are repeated over time and become more widely shared, the values that they embody are  reinforced and reproduced and we speak of them as becoming ‘institutionalized’. ( ① ) In some cases, this institutionalization has a formal face to it, with rules and protocols written down, and specialized roles created to ensure that procedures are followed correctly. ( ② ) The main institutions of state ― parliament, courts, police and so on ― along with certain of  the professions, exhibit this formal character. ( ③ ) Other social institutions, perhaps the majority, are not like this; science is an example. (  ④ )  Although scientists are trained  in the substantive content of their discipline, they are not formally instructed in ‘how to be a good scientist’. ( ⑤ ) We think that these values, along with the values that inform many of the professions, are under threat, just as the value of the professions themselves is under threat.
* apprentice: 도제, 견습  ** inherent: 내재된










The survival characteristics that an organism currently carries may act as a(n)      (A)      to its adaptability when the organism finds itself coping with changes that arise in its (B) .
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① improvement …… diet	② obstacle …… surroundings
③ advantage	…… genes	④ regulator …… mechanisms
⑤ guide	…… traits


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 



41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Fixed Pie: A Key to Success in a Zero-sum Game
② Fixed Pie Tells You How to Get the Biggest Salary
③ Negotiators, Wake Up from the Myth of the Fixed Pie!
④ Want a Fairer Jail Sentence? Stick to the Fixed Pie
⑤ What Alternatives Maximize Fixed-pie Effects?

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Ellen은 끝내야 할 영어 과제가 있었다.
② 카페에서는 요거트 스무디를 팔지 않았다.
③ 한 무리의 학생들이 카페에 들어왔다.
④ Ellen의 아버지는 최근에 아침 축구 클럽에 가입했다.
⑤ Ellen은 카페에 전화를 걸었다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2023학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 저작권 위반 사례를 소개하려고
② 홈페이지 점검 시간을 공지하려고
③ 보안 시스템 업그레이드를 권장하려고
④ 웹사이트 제작 프로그램을 홍보하려고
⑤ 조립식 컴퓨터 구매 방법을 설명하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 매일 다양한 색의 채소를 섭취해야 한다.
② 채소의 종류에 따라 세척 방법이 달라야 한다.
③ 채소는 수확 시기에 따라 맛이 달라질 수 있다.
④ 채소는 냉장 보관하면 비타민 파괴를 늦출 수 있다.
⑤ 익혀서 조리하는 것이 건강에 더 좋은 채소가 있다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 기획자 － 연극배우	② 패션 디자이너 － 사진작가
③ 예술가 － 전시회 관람객	④ 건축가 － 인테리어 업체 직원
⑤ 보안 요원 － 기념품 판매원

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 배드민턴 레슨 등록하기	② 신입 회원에게 행사 공지하기
③ 홍보 포스터 제작하기	④ 소셜 미디어 계정 만들기
⑤ 안내문 게시하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $40	② $45	③ $50	④ $55	⑤ $65







7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 과학 보고서 대회에서 상을 받지 못한 이유를 고르시오.
① 실험 사진을 포함시키지 않아서
② 마감 기한을 지키지 못해서
③ 주제가 창의적이지 않아서
④ 부정확한 정보를 사용해서
⑤ 제시된 분량을 초과해서

8. 대화를 듣고, 2022 Technology Fair에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 주제	② 참여 업체	③ 장소
④ 입장료	⑤ 종료일

9. Junior Money Smart Course에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 강사는 경제학 교수이다.
② 고등학생만을 대상으로 한다.
③ 월요일부터 금요일까지 진행될 것이다.
④ 7월에 등록이 시작된다.
⑤ 등록자 전원에게 선물을 제공할 것이다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 책상용 태블릿 거치대를 고르시오.
Tablet Stands for Desks

①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I’ll put it in the refrigerator.
② Of course. I’ll check tomorrow’s weather.
③ Okay. We can buy it at the store after work.
④ Great. Let’s order from a seafood restaurant.
⑤ Never mind. I don’t care if it’s delivered late.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Absolutely. I’m proud of my son.
② Fantastic. He’ll really enjoy the ride.
③ Too bad. He should have come earlier.
④ It’s all right. The line is getting shorter.
⑤ I’m sorry. Then he’s not allowed to ride.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Don’t worry. I’ll check the date for you.
② Oh, no. We don’t have time to print it out.
③ I see. I’ll put the bread back in the package.
④ I agree. We need to buy more cream cheese.
⑤ Good. I’ll bring some bread to the neighbors.



14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① No, thanks. We already have enough eco-bags.
② That’s a relief. Then we can prepare more presents.
③ That’s true. Last year’s festival was a great success.
④ I appreciate that. That’s why I’ve won the quiz event.
⑤ Right. The book you recommended was so interesting.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Tom이 Alice에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Tom:   	
① You should take advantage of negative reviews for your business.
② You’d better take an online class to get a degree in marketing.
③ Don’t forget the negative effects of enlarging your business.
④ Why don’t you put up an advertisement for your products?
⑤ How about starting a new online business together?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how birds cooperate to collect nesting materials
② why birds use certain materials in nest  building
③ natural substances that are harmful to bird nests
④ shortage of birds’ nesting materials in urban areas
⑤ industrial building materials inspired by bird nests



17. 언급된 재료가 아닌 것은?
① feathers	② mud	③ spiderwebs
④ leaves	⑤ stones
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Hylean Miller,
　Hello, I’m Nelson Perkins, a teacher and swimming coach at Broomstone High School. Last week, I made a reservation for one of your company’s swimming pools for our summer swim camp. However, due to its popularity, thirty more students are coming to the camp than we expected, so we need one more swimming pool for them. The rental section on your website says that there are two other swimming pools during the summer season: the Splash Pool and the Rainbow Pool. Please let me know if an additional rental would be possible. Thank you in advance.
Best Wishes, Nelson Perkins
① 수영 캠프 참가 날짜를 변경하려고
② 수영장 수용 가능 인원을 확인하려고
③ 수영 캠프 등록 방법에 대해 알아보려고
④ 수영장 추가 대여 가능 여부를 문의하려고
⑤ 수영장 대여 취소에 따른 환불을 요청하려고

19. 다음 글에 나타난 Jessica의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? The island tour bus Jessica was riding on was moving slowly toward the ocean cliffs. Outside, the sky was getting dark.
Jessica sighed with concern, “I’m going to miss the sunset because of the traffic.” The bus arrived at the cliffs’ parking lot. While the other passengers were gathering their bags, Jessica quickly got off the bus and she ran up the cliff that was famous for its ocean views. She was about to give up when she got to the top. Just then she saw the setting sun and it still shone brightly in the sky. Jessica said to herself, “The glow of the sun is so beautiful. It’s even better than I expected.”
① worried  → delighted	② bored → confident
③ relieved  → annoyed	④ joyful → indifferent
⑤ regretful → depressed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Consider two athletes who both want to play in college. One says she has to work very hard and the other uses goal setting to create a plan to stay on track and work on specific skills where she is lacking. Both are working hard but only the latter is working smart. It can be frustrating for athletes to work extremely hard but not make the progress they wanted. What can make the difference is drive ― utilizing the mental gear to maximize gains made in the technical and physical areas. Drive provides direction (goals), sustains effort (motivation), and creates a training mindset that goes beyond simply working hard. Drive applies direct force on your physical and technical gears, strengthening and polishing them so they can spin with vigor and purpose. While desire might make you spin those gears faster and harder as you work out or practice, drive is what built them in the first place.

* vigor: 활력, 활기
① 선수들의훈련방식은장점을극대화하는방향으로이루어져야한다.
② 선수들은 최고의성과를얻기위해정신적추진력을잘활용해야한다.
③ 선수들은 단기적 훈련 성과보다 장기적 목표 달성에 힘써야 한다.
④ 선수들은 육체적 훈련과 정신적 훈련을 균형 있게 병행해야 한다.
⑤ 선수들은 수립한 계획을 실행하면서 꾸준히 수정하여야 한다.

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 “view from nowhere”가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Our view of the world is not given to us from the outside in  a pure, objective form; it is shaped by our mental abilities, our shared cultural perspectives and our unique values and beliefs. This is not to say that there is no reality outside our minds or that the world is just an illusion. It is to say that our version of reality is precisely that: our version, not the version. There is no single, universal or authoritative version that makes sense, other than as a theoretical construct. We can see the world only as it appears to us, not “as it truly is,” because there is no “as it truly is” without a perspective to give it form. Philosopher Thomas Nagel argued that there is no “view from nowhere,” since we cannot see the world except from a particular perspective, and that perspective influences what we see. We can experience the world only through the human lenses that make it intelligible to us.
* illusion: 환영
① perception of reality affected by subjective views
② valuable perspective most people have in mind
③ particular view adopted by very few people
④ critical insight that defeats our prejudices
⑤ unbiased and objective view of the world






22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Often overlooked, but just as important a stakeholder, is the consumer who plays a large role in the notion of the privacy paradox. Consumer engagement levels in all manner of digital experiences and communities have simply exploded ― and they show little or no signs of slowing. There is an awareness among consumers, not only that their personal data helps to drive the rich experiences that these companies provide, but also that sharing this data is the price you pay for these experiences, in whole or in part. Without a better understanding of the what, when, and why of data collection and use, the consumer is often left feeling vulnerable and conflicted. “I love this restaurant-finder app on my phone, but what happens to my data if I press ‘ok’ when asked if that app can use my current location?” Armed with tools that can provide them options, the consumer moves from passive bystander to active participant.
* stakeholder: 이해관계자 ** vulnerable: 상처를 입기 쉬운
① 개인정보 제공의 속성을 심층적으로 이해하면 주체적 소비자가 된다.
② 소비자는 디지털 시대에 유용한 앱을 적극 활용하는 자세가 필요하다.
③ 현명한 소비자가 되려면 다양한 디지털 데이터를 활용해야 한다.
④ 기업의 디지털 서비스를 이용하면 상응하는 대가가 뒤따른다.
⑤ 타인과의 정보 공유로 인해 개인정보가 유출되기도 한다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Considerable work by cultural psychologists and anthropologists has shown that there are indeed large and sometimes surprising differences in the words and concepts that different cultures have for describing emotions, as well as in the social circumstances that draw out the expression of particular emotions. However, those data do not actually show that different cultures have different emotions, if we think of emotions as central, neurally implemented states. As for, say, color vision, they just say that, despite the same internal processing architecture, how we interpret, categorize, and name emotions varies according to culture and that we learn in a particular culture the social context in which it is appropriate to express emotions. However, the emotional states themselves are likely to be quite invariant across cultures. In a sense, we can think of a basic, culturally universal emotion set that is shaped by evolution and implemented in the brain, but the links between such emotional states and stimuli, behavior, and other cognitive states are plastic and can be modified by learning in a specific cultural context.
* anthropologist: 인류학자 ** stimuli: 자극 *** cognitive: 인지적인
① essential links between emotions and behaviors
② culturally constructed representation of emotions
③ falsely described emotions through global languages
④ universally defined emotions across academic disciplines
⑤ wider influence of cognition on learning cultural contexts




24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The approach, joint cognitive systems, treats a robot as part of a human-machine team where the intelligence is synergistic, arising from the contributions of each agent. The team consists of at least one robot and one human and is often called a mixed team because it is a mixture of human and robot agents. Self-driving cars, where a person turns on and off the driving, is an example of a joint cognitive system. Entertainment robots are examples of mixed teams as are robots for telecommuting. The design process concentrates on how the agents will cooperate and coordinate with each other to accomplish the team goals. Rather than treating robots as peer agents with their own completely independent agenda, joint cognitive systems approaches treat robots as helpers such as service animals or sheep dogs. In joint cognitive system designs, artificial intelligence is used along with human-robot interaction principles to create robots that can be intelligent enough to be good team members.
① Better Together: Human and Machine Collaboration
② Can Robots Join Forces to Outperform Human Teams?
③ Loss of Humanity in the Human and Machine Conflict
④ Power Off: When and How to Say No to Robot Partners
⑤ Shifting from Service Animals to Robot Assistants of Humans


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Resident Patent Applications per Million Population for the Top 6 Origins, in 2009 and in 2019

20092019
Rank
Origin Resident patent applications per million population
Rank
Origin Resident patent applications per million population1Republic of Korea2,5821Republic of Korea3,3192Japan2,3062Japan1,9433Switzerland9753Switzerland1,1224Germany8914China8905U.S.7335Germany8846Finland6096U.S.869Note: The top 6 origins were included if they had a population greater than 5 million and if they had more than 100 resident patent applications.
　The above tables show the resident patent applications per million population for the top 6 origins in 2009 and in 2019.
① The Republic of Korea, Japan, and Switzerland, the top three origins in 2009, maintained their rankings in 2019. ② Germany, which sat fourth on the 2009 list with 891 resident patent applications per million population, fell to fifth place on the 2019 list with 884 resident patent applications per million population. ③ The U.S. fell from fifth place on  the 2009 list to sixth place on the 2019 list, showing a decrease in the number of resident patent applications per million population.
④ Among the top 6 origins which made the list in 2009, Finland was the only origin which did not make it again in 2019. ⑤ On the other hand, China, which did not make the  list of the top 6 origins in 2009, sat fourth on the 2019 list with 890 resident patent applications per million population.



26. William Buckland에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? William Buckland (1784?1856) was well known as one of the greatest geologists in his time. His birthplace, Axminster in Britain, was rich with fossils, and as a child, he naturally became interested in fossils while collecting them. In 1801, Buckland
won a scholarship and was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He developed his scientific knowledge there while attending John Kidd’s lectures on mineralogy and chemistry. After Kidd resigned his position, Buckland was appointed his successor at the college. Buckland used representative samples and large-scale geological maps in his lectures, which made his lectures more lively. In 1824, he announced the discovery of the bones of a giant creature, and he named it Megalosaurus, or ‘great lizard’. He won the prize from the Geological Society due to his achievements in geology.
① 태어난 곳은 화석이 풍부하였다.
② John Kidd의 강의를 들으며 자신의 과학 지식을 발전시켰다.
③ John Kidd의 사임 전에 그의 후임자로 임명되었다.
④ 자신의 강의에서 대축척 지질학 지도를 사용하였다.
⑤ 1824년에 거대 생물 뼈의 발견을 발표하였다.
27. 
2022 Sunbay High School Benefit Concert에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

2022 Sunbay High School Benefit Concert
　Sunbay High School students will be holding their benefit concert for charity. All profits will be donated to the local children’s hospital. Come and enjoy your family and friends’ performances.
Date & Time: Thursday, June 30, 2022 at 6 p.m.
Place: Sunbay High School’s Vision Hall
Events
?singing, dancing, drumming, and other musical performances
?special performance by singer Jonas Collins, who graduated from Sunbay High School
Tickets
?$3 per person
?available to buy from 5 p.m. at the front desk of Vision Hall
Other Attractions
?club students’ artwork on display, but not for purchase
?free face-painting
　For more information about the concert, feel free to contact us at concert@sunbayhighs.edu.
① 수익금 전액은 지역 아동 병원에 기부될 것이다.
② Sunbay  고등학교의 Vision Hall에서 열린다.
③ Sunbay  고등학교를 졸업한 가수의 특별 공연이 있다.
④ 티켓은 오후 5시부터 살 수 있다.
⑤ 동아리 학생들의 전시 작품은 구입이 가능하다.

28. Shooting Star Viewing Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Shooting Star Viewing Event
　Would you like to watch the rare shooting star, coming on Sunday, July 24? The Downtown Central Science Museum is the perfect spot to catch the vivid view!
Registration
?Online only ― www.dcsm.org
?From July l to July 14
?The number of participants will be limited to 50.
Schedule on July 24
?8:00 p.m.: Participants will gather at the hall and then move to the rooftop.
?8:30 p.m.: Guides will explain how to observe the shooting star.
?9:00 p.m.?11:00 p.m.: We will share the experience of the shooting star.
Notes
?If  the  event  is  cancelled  due  to  the  weather  conditions, notice will be given via text message.
?Outside food and drinks are not allowed.
① 현장 등록이 가능하다.
② 참가 인원에 제한이 없다.
③ 참가자들은 오후 9시에 홀에서 모여 옥상으로 이동할 것이다.
④ 기상 상황으로 인한 행사 취소 시 문자 메시지로 공지될 것이다.
⑤ 외부 음식과 음료는 허용된다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Ecosystems differ in composition and extent. They can be defined as ranging from the communities and interactions of organisms in your mouth or ① those in the canopy of a rain forest to all those in Earth’s oceans. The processes ② governing them differ in complexity and speed. There are systems that turn over in minutes, and there are others ③ which rhythmic time extends to hundreds of years. Some ecosystems are extensive (‘biomes’, such as the African savanna); some cover regions (river basins); many involve clusters of villages (micro-watersheds); others are confined to the level of a single village (the village pond). In each example there is an element of indivisibility. Divide an ecosystem into parts by creating barriers, and the sum of the productivity of the parts will typically be found to be lower than the productivity of the whole, other things ④ being equal. The mobility of biological populations is a reason. Safe passages, for example, enable migratory species ⑤ to survive.
* canopy: 덮개 ** basin: 유역









30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　In recent years urban transport professionals globally have largely acquiesced to the view that automobile demand in  cities needs to be managed rather than accommodated. Rising incomes inevitably lead to increases in motorization. Even without the imperative of climate change, the physical constraints of densely inhabited cities and the corresponding demands of accessibility, mobility, safety, air pollution, and urban livability all ① limit the option of expanding road networks purely to accommodate this rising demand. As a result, as cities develop and their residents become more prosperous, ② persuading people to choose not to use cars becomes an increasingly key focus of city managers and planners. Improving the quality of
③ alternative options, such as walking, cycling, and public
transport, is a central element of this strategy. However, the most direct approach to ④ accommodating automobile demand is making motorized travel more expensive or restricting  it with administrative rules. The contribution of motorized travel to climate change ⑤ reinforces this imperative.
* acquiesce: 따르다 ** imperative: 불가피한 것 *** constraint: 압박

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Young contemporary artists who employ digital technologies in their practice rarely make reference to computers. For example, Wade Guyton, an abstractionist who uses a word processing program and inkjet printers, does not call himself a computer artist. Moreover, some critics, who admire his work, are little concerned about his extensive use of computers in the art-making process. This is a marked contrast from three decades ago when artists who utilized computers were labeled by critics ― often disapprovingly ― as computer artists. For the present generation of artists, the computer, or more appropriately, the laptop, is one in a collection of integrated, portable digital technologies that link their social and working life. With tablets and cell phones surpassing personal computers in Internet usage, and as slim digital devices resemble nothing like the room-sized mainframes and bulky desktop computers of previous decades, it now appears that the computer artist is finally 	.
① awake	② influential
③ distinct	④ troublesome
⑤ extinct











32. The critic who wants to write about literature from a formalist perspective must first be a close and careful reader who examines all the elements of a text individually and questions how they come together to create a work of art. Such a reader, who respects the autonomy of a work, achieves an understanding of it by 	. Instead of examining historical periods, author biographies, or literary styles, for example, he or she will approach a text with the assumption that it is a self-contained entity and that he or she  is looking for the governing principles that allow the text to reveal itself. For example, the correspondences between the characters in James Joyce’s short story “Araby” and the people he knew personally may be interesting, but for the formalist they are less relevant to understanding how the story creates meaning than are other kinds of information that the story contains within itself.
* entity: 실체
① putting himself or herself both inside and outside it
② finding a middle ground between it and the world
③ searching for historical realities revealed within it
④ looking inside it, not outside it or beyond it
⑤ exploring its characters’ cultural relevance


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Manufacturers design their innovation processes  around  the way they think the process works. The vast majority of manufacturers still think that product development and service development are always done by  manufacturers,  and  that their job is always to find a need and fill it rather than to sometimes find and commercialize an innovation that
 	. Accordingly, manufacturers have set up market-research departments to explore the needs of users in the target market, product-development groups to think up suitable products to address those needs, and so forth. The needs and prototype solutions of lead users ― if encountered at all ― are typically rejected as outliers of no interest. Indeed, when lead users’ innovations do enter a firm’s product line ― and they have been shown to be the actual source of many major innovations for many firms ― they typically arrive with a lag and by an unusual and unsystematic route. [3점]
* lag: 지연
① lead users tended to overlook
② lead users have already developed
③ lead users encountered in the market
④ other firms frequently put into use
⑤ both users and firms have valued





34. Development can get very complicated and fanciful. A fugue by Johann Sebastian Bach illustrates how far this process could go, when a single melodic line, sometimes just a handful of notes, was all that the composer needed to create a brilliant work containing lots of intricate development within a coherent structure. Ludwig van Beethoven’s famous Fifth Symphony provides an exceptional example of how much mileage a classical composer can get out of a few notes and a simple rhythmic tapping. The opening da-da-da-DUM that everyone has heard somewhere or another   	                                                                     throughout not only the opening movement, but the remaining three movements, like a kind of motto or a connective thread. Just as we don’t always see the intricate brushwork that goes into the creation of a painting, we may not always notice how Beethoven keeps finding fresh uses for his motto or how he develops his material into a large, cohesive statement. But a lot of the enjoyment we get from that mighty symphony stems from the inventiveness behind it, the impressive development of musical ideas. [3점]
* intricate: 복잡한 ** coherent: 통일성 있는
① makes the composer’s musical ideas contradictory
② appears in an incredible variety of ways
③ provides extensive musical knowledge creatively
④ remains fairly calm within the structure
⑤ becomes deeply associated with one’s own enjoyment
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　The animal in a conflict between attacking a rival and fleeing may initially not have sufficient information to enable it to make a decision straight away. ① If the rival is likely to win the fight, then the optimal decision would be to give up immediately and not risk getting injured. ② But if the rival is weak and easily defeatable, then there could be considerable benefit in going ahead and obtaining the territory, females, food or whatever is at stake. ③ Animals under normal circumstances maintain a very constant body weight and they eat and drink enough for their needs at regular intervals. ④ By taking a little extra time to collect information about the opponent, the animal is more likely to reach a decision that maximizes its chances of winning than if it takes a decision without such information. ⑤ Many signals are now seen as having this information gathering or ‘assessment’ function, directly contributing to the mechanism of the decision-making process by supplying vital information about the likely outcomes of the various options.





[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) If multicelled organisms were indeed found to have evolved before single-celled organisms, then the theory of evolution would be rejected. A good scientific theory always allows for the possibility of rejection. The fact that we have not found such a case in countless examinations of the fossil record strengthens the case for evolutionary theory.
(B) The fossil record supports this prediction ― multicelled organisms are found in layers of earth millions of years after the first appearance of single-celled organisms. Note that the possibility always remains that the opposite could be found.
(C) Apart from demonstrating that evolution did occur, the fossil record also provides tests of the predictions made from evolutionary theory. For example, the theory predicts that single-celled organisms evolved before multicelled organisms.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) Sometimes, the smartest thing a person can do is quit. Although this is true, it has also become a tired and played-out argument. Sunk cost doesn’t always have to be a bad thing.
(B) This leads people to continue on paths or pursuits that should clearly be abandoned. For example, people often remain in terrible relationships simply because they’ve invested a great deal of themselves into them. Or someone may continue pouring money into a business that is  clearly a bad idea in the market.
(C) Actually, you can leverage this human tendency to your benefit. Like someone invests a great deal of money in a personal trainer to ensure they follow through on their commitment, you, too, can invest a great deal up front to ensure you stay on the path you want to be on. [3점]
* leverage: 이용하다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
The dynamics of collective detection have an interesting feature. Which cue(s) do individuals use as evidence of predator attack? In some cases, when an individual detects a predator, its best response is to seek shelter. ( ① ) Departure from the group may signal danger to nonvigilant animals and cause what appears to be a coordinated flushing  of  prey  from the area. ( ② ) Studies on dark-eyed juncos (a type of bird) support the view that nonvigilant animals attend to departures of individual group mates but that the departure of multiple individuals causes a greater escape response in the nonvigilant individuals. (  ③ )  If one group member departs,  it might have done so for a number of reasons that have little to do with predation threat. ( ④ ) If nonvigilant animals escaped each time a single member  left the group, they would  frequently respond when there was no predator  (a  false alarm). ( ⑤ ) On the other hand, when several individuals depart the group at the same time, a true threat is much more likely to be present. [3점]
* predator: 포식자 ** vigilant: 경계하는 *** flushing: 날아오름

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

Also, it has become difficult for companies to develop new pesticides, even those that can have major beneficial effects and few negative effects.
　Simply maintaining yields at current levels often requires new cultivars and management methods, since pests and diseases continue to evolve, and aspects of the chemical, physical, and social environment can change over several decades. ( ① ) In the 1960s, many people considered pesticides to be mainly beneficial to mankind. ( ② ) Developing new, broadly effective, and persistent pesticides often was considered to be the best way to control pests on crop plants. ( ③ ) Since that time, it has become apparent that broadly effective pesticides can have harmful effects on beneficial insects, which can negate their effects in controlling pests, and that persistent pesticides can damage non-target organisms in the ecosystem, such as birds and people. ( ④ ) Very high costs are involved in following all of the procedures needed to gain government approval for new pesticides. ( ⑤ ) Consequently, more consideration is being given to other ways to manage pests, such as incorporating greater resistance to pests into cultivars by breeding and using other biological control methods.
* pesticide: 살충제 ** cultivar: 품종 *** breed: 개량하다














In a technology and information society, human beings, whose bodily movement is less      (A)       , appear to    have gained increased mobility and power, and such a mobility-related human condition raises the issue of social
         (B) .

(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① necessary…… inequality	② necessary…… growth
③ limited	…… consciousness	④ desirable …… service
⑤ desirable …… divide


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 













41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do We Judge Independently? The Effect of Crowds
② Winning Strategy: How Not to Be Fooled by Others
③ Do Emergencies Affect the Way of Our Thinking?
④ Stepping Towards Harmony with Your Neighbors
⑤ Ways of Helping Others in Emergent Situations


42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Noah는 학기 첫날 자신의 기숙사 방을 둘러보고 실망했다.
② Noah는 노란색 탁자가자신들의 방을더독특하게 만들것이라고 말했다.
③ Noah는 Steve가 잠든 사이에 가구를 다시 배치했다.
④ Noah는 Sammy의 거실에 커다란 탁자가 있던 것을 떠올렸다.
⑤ Noah와 Steve  둘 다 보드게임 하는 것을 즐겼다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2021학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1



1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 아파트 입주민 회의 참여를 독려하려고
② 아파트 입주민을 위한 앱을 소개하려고
③ 아파트 관리비 납부 방법 변경을 알리려고
④ 아파트 시설 보수 공사 계획을 안내하려고
⑤ 아파트 단지 내 승강기 점검 일정을 공지하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 근력 운동은 관절 강화에 효과적이다.
② 스트레칭을 통해 자세 교정이 가능하다.
③ 몸 상태에 따라 운동량을 조절할 필요가 있다.
④ 규칙적인 운동은 스트레스 완화에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 바른 자세로 운동하는 것은 부상 위험을 줄인다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 교사 ? 학생	② 학생회장 ? 졸업생
③ 진로 상담사 ? 학부모	④ 콘서트 진행자 ? 관객
⑤ 드럼 연주자 ? 악기점 주인
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 회의 참석하기	② 티켓 출력하기
③ 저녁 준비하기	④ 유니폼 가져오기
⑤ 자동차 수리하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90	② $99	③ $108	④ $110	⑤ $120

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 Katie Wood의 책 사인회에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.

① 요리 수업을 들어야 해서
② 사촌 결혼식에 참석해야 해서
③ 중국어 시험공부를 해야 해서
④ 도서관 봉사 활동을 해야 해서
⑤ 에세이 쓰기 대회에 참가해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Summer Computer Coding Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 장소	② 운영 기간	③ 수강료
④ 수업 시간	⑤ 신청 마감일

9. Rescue the Animals에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 시청 광장에서 열릴 것이다.
② 20개가 넘는 부스가 있을 것이다.
③ 구조된 동물들의 사진들이 전시될 것이다.
④ 기부자들에게 동물 모양의 열쇠고리를 줄 것이다.
⑤ 시청 옆 공터는 주차장으로 사용될 것이다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 음악 축제를 고르시오.
Music Festivals

①
②
③
④
⑤

1 . 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① I should be there by the end of this month.
② Working on the marketing team isn’t easy.
③ I have to go to Canada for a job interview.
④ They haven’t hired a new manager yet.
⑤ My family is going to travel with me.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Excuse me. I can’t find where my baggage is.
② Hurry up. We might miss the train to the airport.
③ Okay. I’d like to buy a ticket for the earlier flight.
④ Really? I’m sorry that there are no seats available today.
⑤ I see. I’ll let you know when we arrive at the destination.




2 영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.

Woman:  	

① Right. That’s why I always check customers’ reviews.
② I’d rather not. It’s too late to get a refund for the laptop bag.
③ Thanks for your tip. I can save money by using a rental service.
④ That makes sense. I should read the reviews to make a decision.
⑤ Don’t worry. The item I ordered online will be delivered soon.


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Man:  	

① That’s true. I received an acceptance letter from the university.
② You’re right. I’ll think about the internship in a more positive way.
③ I agree. The experience helped me a lot in getting a job.
④ No problem. I can take the fashion class next semester.
⑤ Thank you. I’ve dreamed of working in your company.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Brown이 Andrew에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Ms. Brown:  	

① How about reading Spanish books on a regular basis?
② I recommend you read more science books for yourself.
③ What do you think of taking an extra class to get a good score?
④ You’d better write book reports to improve your writing skills.
⑤ Why not try books with different themes to grow your vocabulary?


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① materials used for writing before paper
② difficulties of processing natural materials
③ ways raw materials were stored in the past
④ writing materials that affected printing techniques
⑤ common characteristics of eco-friendly materials


17. 언급된 재료가 아닌 것은?
① clay	② papyrus	③ stone
④ animal skins	⑤ silk



18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear City Council Members,
 My name is Celina Evans and I am a lifelong Woodridge resident. The Woodridge Children’s Theater has been the pride of our community since 1975. My daughter Katie has been participating in the theater’s activities for six years. The theater has meant so much to so many in our community. However, I have been made aware that you are considering cutting the budget of the theater. The experiences and life lessons children gain at the theater are invaluable. Not only do kids learn about the arts there, but they also learn skills that will last for a lifetime. To reduce funding would be a huge loss to future generations and thus I strongly object to it. Thank you for your consideration in this matter.
Sincerely,
Celina Evans

① 지역 어린이 극장 이용료 인하를 건의하려고
② 지역 문화 시설 이용 시간 연장을 제안하려고
③ 지역 어린이 극장 설립을 위한 기부를 요청하려고
④ 지역 어린이 극장에 대한 예산 삭감을 반대하려고
⑤ 지역 주민들을 위한 문화 공간 부족에 대해 항의하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 The day for my teaching evaluation arrived. The principal was present to grade my teaching. My heart pounded heavily. I said a little prayer quietly before stepping into the classroom. As I entered the classroom, the tense atmosphere turned into wild laughter. I stood at the front of the classroom wearing my funny dress instead of my formal work clothes, which helped me to get the students’ attention. I took a deep breath and started the language activity with a catchy song that students love. Soon, the magic took off and all the students were blown away. When the class ended, all the students and even the principal started clapping. The class was a success! All my time and effort had finally paid off.
① excited → confused	② jealous → relaxed
③ nervous → satisfied	④ hopeful → terrified
⑤ regretful → delighted

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 More often than not, modern parents are paralyzed by the fear that they will no longer be liked or even loved by their children if they scold them for any reason. They want their children’s friendship above all, and are willing to sacrifice respect to get it. This is not good. A child will have many friends, but only two parents ― if that ― and parents are more, not less, than friends. Friends have very limited authority to correct. Every parent therefore needs to learn to tolerate the momentary anger or even hatred directed toward them by their children, after necessary corrective action has been taken, as the capacity of children to perceive or care about long-term consequences is very limited. Parents are the judges of society. They teach children how to behave so that other people will be able to interact meaningfully and productively with them.
① 부모는 두려워 말고 자녀의 잘못된 행동을 바로잡아 주어야 한다.
② 부모는 자녀의 신뢰를 얻기 위해 일관된 태도로 양육해야 한다.
③ 부모는 다양한 경험을 제공하여 자녀의 사회화를 도와야 한다.
④ 부모는 자녀의 친구 관계에 지나치게 개입하지 말아야 한다.
⑤ 부모는 자녀와 유대감을 쌓으며 친구의 역할을 해야 한다.


	

영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 the mind’s eye is blind가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로
가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

 All any neuron in the brain ever “sees” is that some change occurred in the firing patterns of its upstream peers. It cannot tell whether such change is caused by an external disturbance or by the brain’s constant self-organized activity. Thus, neurons located in networks of other neurons do not “know” what the brain’s sensors are sensing; they simply respond to their upstream inputs. In other words, the neurons have no way of relating or comparing their spikes to anything else because they only receive retinal correspondences or processed “representations” of the sensory input. But establishing correspondences without knowing the rules by which those correspondences are constructed is like comparing Mansi words with Khanty words when we understand neither language. Only after we have defined the vocabulary of one language can we understand the corresponding meaning of words in the other. Similarly, without further information, sensory neurons can attach no meaning whatsoever to their spikes. Put simply, the mind’s eye is blind.

23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Early astronomers saw and learned more from eclipses and other forms of shadow than from direct observation. In Galileo’s time, the empiricist’s insistence on direct observation as the only legitimate way of knowing limited what could be learned about the cosmos, and the medievalist allowance for extraperceptual insights had nothing to contribute to what we would consider scientific inquiry. Galileo’s breakthroughs came in part from his understanding of how to use shadows to extend his powers of observation. At the time he trained his telescope on Venus, it was believed the planet shone with its own light and moved in an orbit independent of the sun. Galileo saw that the planet was in partial shadow as it went through its phases, and thus had to be a dark body. He also realized from the logic of the shadow that Venus orbited the sun, since all phases from new to full could be observed from earth. The end of the Ptolemaic system came quickly thereafter, a shadow thus shedding light on the ordering of the cosmos.
* Ptolemaic system: 천동설

① difficulties in observing and tracking shadows

* spike: 전기 신호 ** retinal: 망막의

① The brain sees only by linking imagination and experience.
② Neurons respond to sensory input without understanding it.
③ Signals carried by neurons cannot be explained in experiments.
④ The brain stops imagining scenes and starts storing visual data.
⑤ Some visual inputs do not always need the brain for their processing.


2 . 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 The way reduced prices are written during a sale will greatly affect people’s attitude toward the products (and their likelihood of purchasing them). If the sale prices are easy to understand using percentages (for example, “-50%”) or with the new prices already calculated (for example, “now only
$20”), shoppers will react in an automatic and positive fashion. However, if it is necessary for them to do complex mental calculations (for example, if a $27.50 product is advertised at 12% off), they will switch to a more analytical style of thinking. This results in more attention spent on the calculation, and subsequently on the merits of the product. No longer feeling spontaneous, shoppers will start questioning whether it is actually a good deal or not, whether they really need another pair of shoes, etc. The more cognitive effort is demanded from shoppers, the more of a negative and suspicious reaction will be evoked, and the chances of making a sale diminish.
① 상품 할인율이 클수록 상품의 단점이 쉽게 노출될 수 있다.
② 경쟁 상품과 비교되는 품질 정보 제시는 판매에 효과적이다.
③ 상품에 대한 공인된 평가가 소비에 대한 심리적 장벽을 낮춘다.
④ 상품 판매율을 높이기 위해 다양한 소비 성향 분석이 필요하다.
⑤ 상품 할인가 제시 방식의 인지적 부담 정도가 판매에 영향을 준다.

② lack of various devices used to observe the universe
③ consistency in human aspiration toward space exploration
④ ways to record planetary movements with early technology
⑤ importance of shadow in making new discoveries in astronomy


24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Moral philosophy textbooks often proclaim that we can discern if a claim is ethical by attending to the use of the words “is” and “ought.” On this suggestion, the claim “You ought to keep your promises,” because it uses “ought,” is ethical. “An atom is small,” because it uses “is,” is nonethical. Yet, despite being commonly invoked, this is-ought test is seriously deficient. Some is-statements have ethical content and some ought-statements do not. For example, consider the claims “Murder is wrong” and “Friendship is good.” These claims obviously have ethical content. Whatever the is-ought test is tracking, these claims clearly fall on the ought side of that divide. Yet they both use “is.” Similarly, consider the claim “The train ought to arrive in an hour.” This statement is clearly nonethical, the use of “ought” notwithstanding. There is an important distinction between ethical and nonethical claims. But we can’t simply rely on “is” and “ought” to make it. Instead we need to attend to the substance of the claim.
* invoke: 예로서 인용하다

① Mutually Exclusive Relationship Between “Is” and “Ought”
② Sounds Unethical to You? Check Your Moral Standard First
③ What Determines Ethicality of a Claim, Word Choice or Content?
④ How We Can Get to Harmony of Linguistic Forms and Functions
⑤ To Use “Is” or “Ought,” That Is the Key to Ethical Statements!




4	영어 영역

25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Perceived and Actual Food Waste in Households by Country, 2017-2018


Country　Perceived food waste (%)
( A )　　Actual food waste (%)
( B ) Gap (B-A)U.S.15249Canada102111Poland10122Denmark104-6Mexico6137Germany6126Switzerland51813Russia561 The table above shows the percentage of perceived and actual food waste of household groceries and the gap between those percentages for selected countries from 2017 to 2018. ① The
U.S. showed the highest percentage of actual food waste among the countries, and almost one quarter of all food there went to the bin. ② While Canada, Poland and Denmark recorded the same figures in the percentage of perceived food waste, Canada was the only country which exceeded twenty percent in actual food waste among those three countries. ③ In perceived food waste, Mexico was just one percentage point higher than Russia, but the percentage of actual food waste in Mexico was more than three times that in Russia. ④ Switzerland had the biggest gap between perceived and actual food waste percentages, and this gap was more than twice as big as that of Germany. ⑤ Of all the countries above, the only one where the percentage of actual food waste was lower than that of perceived food waste was Denmark.

26. Donald Griffin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 Donald Griffin was an American biophysicist and animal behaviourist known for his research in animal navigation, acoustic orientation, and sensory biophysics. During his childhood, he was influenced by his uncle, who was a Harvard professor of biology. Griffin received a Ph.D. in zoology from Harvard University in 1942. He demonstrated that bats emit high-frequency sounds with which they can locate objects as small as flying insects. In 1965, he became a professor at Rockefeller University in New York and a research zoologist for the New York Zoological Society. After he retired from Rockefeller University in 1986, he didn’t stop his research: he continued to present papers at national and international meetings. In the late 1970s Griffin argued that animals might possess the ability to think and reason. Although his claim sparked much controversy in the science community, there is no question that he radically opened up the field of animal cognition.
① 미국의 생물 물리학자이자 동물 행동학자이다.
② 어렸을 때 수학 교수인 삼촌에게 영향을 받았다.
③ 박쥐가 고주파음으로 사물의 위치를 파악함을 증명했다.
④ Rockefeller University 퇴직 후 연구를 멈추지 않았다.
⑤ 동물이 생각하고 추론하는 능력을 지녔을 수 있다고 주장했다.
27. 
Leather Craft Class에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?


① 초보자를 위해 만들어진 수업이다.
② 토요일에 3시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 참가비에 가죽, 도구, 간식이 포함된다.
④ 각 참가자는 최대 3개의 품목을 만들 수 있다.
⑤ 사전 등록이 요구된다.

28. Handwriting Competition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 참가비가 있다.
② 연령에 따라 세 그룹으로 나뉜다.
③ 입상자는 현금을 상으로 받는다.
④ 줄이 있는 종이에 시를 옮겨 써야 한다.
⑤ 잉크 색에 상관없이 출품 가능하다.


	




29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]

영어 영역	5
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

 The world’s first complex writing form, Sumerian cuneiform, followed an evolutionary path, moving around 3500 BCE from pictographic to ideographic representations, from the depiction of objects to ① that of abstract notions. Sumerian cuneiform was a linear writing system, its symbols usually ② set in columns, read from top to bottom and from left to right. This regimentation was a form of abstraction: the world is not a linear place, and objects do not organize ③ themselves horizontally or vertically in real life. Early rock paintings, thought to have been created for ritual purposes, were possibly shaped and organized ④ to follow the walls of the cave, or the desires of the painters, who may have organized them symbolically, or artistically, or even randomly. Yet after cuneiform, virtually every form of script that has emerged has been set out in rows with a clear beginning and endpoint. So ⑤ uniformly is this expectation, indeed, that the odd exception is noteworthy, and generally established for a specific purpose.
* cuneiform: 쐐기 문자 ** regimentation: 조직화















30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

 It’s likely that for a very long time people managed to survive with draped animal pelts and then began roughly sewing these together. Ultimately, though, the ① advantages of using woven fabric for clothing would have become obvious. A fur pelt offers
② inadequate thermal protection if someone is sitting still, but once on the move or in strong winds, this is less true, because pelts aren’t shaped close to the body. The more air gets between the body and the clothing, the less effective it is at trapping an insulating layer of air close to the skin. In fact, the insulating properties of clothing ③ decrease very much when walking quickly. Clothing also needs to be breathable, because damp clothes are bad at keeping the wearer warm and become very heavy. Woven fabrics are more breathable than fur and, when specifically tailored to the body, make excellent internal layers, ④ preventing cold air from getting direct access to the skin’s surface. Thus the ability to create woven clothing would have offered material advantages to our early ancestors once they had left Africa for ⑤ cooler areas.
* drape: 걸치다 ** thermal: 열의 *** insulate: 단열하다
31. 
Contrary to popular opinion, woodpeckers don’t restrict
themselves to rotten trees, and they often start construction in healthy trees. Just like us, woodpeckers want the place where they bring up their families to be solid and durable. Even though the birds are well equipped to hammer away at healthy wood, it would be too much for them to complete the job all at once. And that’s why they take a months-long break after making a hole that may be only an inch or two deep, hoping fungi will pitch in. As far as the fungi are concerned, this is the invitation they have been waiting for, because usually they can’t get past the bark. In this case, the fungi quickly move into the opening and begin to break down the wood. What the tree sees as a coordinated attack, the woodpecker sees as a(n) 	. After a while, the wood fibers are so soft that it’s much easier for the woodpecker to enlarge the hole.
* fungi: fungus(균류)의 복수형
① division of labor
② act of sympathy
③ process of negotiation
④ competition for habitat
⑤ defense from predators










32. The urban environment is generally designed so as not to
make contact with our skin. We do not push through bushes on our way to school or work. Roads and sidewalks are kept clear of obstacles. Only once in a while are we reminded of the materiality of the environment, as when we feel the brush of an unexpected tree branch or nearly fall over a curb. Most of our time is not even spent outside. “Outside” is often just a space we go through to get “inside.” Our time is largely spent indoors, where architecture and design collude to provide an environment as lacking as possible in tactile stimulation. In the modern university or office building, floors and walls are flat and smooth, corridors are clear, the air is still, the temperature is neutral, and elevators carry one effortlessly from one level to another. It is commonly assumed that we are best served by our tactile environment when 	.
* collude: 결탁하다
① we accept its harsh elements
② we scarcely notice its presence
③ it does not hinder social interactions
④ we experience it using all the senses
⑤ its design reflects the natural environment




6	영어	영역

3.The ideal sound quality varies a lot in step with technological and cultural changes. Consider, for instance, the development of new digital audio formats such as MP3 and AAC. Various media feed us daily with data-compressed audio, and   some   people   rarely   experience   CD-quality   (that   is, technical quality) audio. This tendency could lead to a new generation of listeners with other sound quality preferences. Research by Stanford University professor Jonathan Berger adds fuel to  this  thesis.  Berger  tested  first-year  university students’  preferences for MP3s annually for ten years. He reports that each year more and more students come to prefer MP3s to   CD-quality   audio.   These   findings   indicate   that listeners  gradually  become  accustomed  to  data-compressed formats and change their listening preferences accordingly. The point is that while technical improvements strive toward increased sound quality in a technical sense (e.g., higher resolution and greater bit rate), listeners’ expectations do not necessarily   follow   the   same   path.   As   a   result,   “improved” technical digital sound quality may in some cases lead to a(n) 	. [3점]
* compress: 압축하다
① decrease in the perceptual worth of the sound
② failure to understand the original function of music
③  realization of more sophisticated musical inspiration
④ agreement on ideal sound quality across generations
⑤  revival of listeners’ preference for CD-quality audio

34. Science shows that  	 like gear teeth in a bicycle chain. Rich and novel experiences, like the recollections of the summers of our youth, have lots of new information associated with them. During those hot days, we learned how to swim or traveled to new places or mastered riding a bike without training wheels. The days went by slowly with those adventures. Yet, our adult lives have less novelty and newness, and are full of repeated tasks such as commuting or sending email or doing paperwork. The associated information filed for those chores is smaller, and there is less new footage for the recall part of the brain to draw upon. Our brain interprets these days filled with boring events as shorter, so summers swiftly speed by. Despite our desire for better clocks, our measuring stick of time isn’t fixed. We don’t measure time with seconds, like our clocks, but by our experiences. For us, time can slow down or time can fly. [3점]
* footage: 장면
① the memory functions of our brain wear out with age
② the richness of experiences relies on intellectual capacity

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Research has shown that individuals ? especially those who have benefited from a particular system ? are prone to support and rationalize the status quo, even if there are clear problems.
 ① These people justify systemic inequity with familiar phrases like “If you just work hard enough you can pull yourself up by your   bootstraps.”   ② A   branch   of   psychology   called system justificationtheory describes how people tend to see social, economic, and political systems as good, fair, and legitimate if they have succeeded as a result of those systems. ③ According to Erin Godfrey, a professor of applied psychology at New York University, “The people who are at the top want to believe in meritocracy because it means that they deserve their successes.” ④ Indeed, it is not surprising that there exists a general consensus across social class about the definition and the results of meritocracy. ⑤ Those who are in an advantaged position in society are more likely to believe the system is fair and see no reason to change it.
* status quo: 현재 상태 ** meritocracy: 능력주의


[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) This  fat-and  sugar-rich  treat  is  like  chips  and  chocolate to an ant. The tiny creatures quickly carry the seeds back to their nest, where the colony is waiting eagerly in the tunnels for the calorie boost. The tasty treat is bitten off and the seed itself is discarded.
(B) Ants are motivated by their desire to eat them, and their interest   is   triggered   when   forget-me-nots   form   their seeds. The seeds are designed to make an ant’s mouth water, for attached to the outside is a structure called an elaiosome, which looks like a tiny bit of cake.
(C) Along come the trash collectors in the form of worker ants, which dispose of the seeds in the neighborhood ― carrying them up to 200 feet away from home base. Wild strawberries and other plants also benefit from this distribution service: ants are nature’s gardeners, as it were.
* forget-me-not: 물망초

③ the information storage system in our mind runs restlessly
④ the temporal context of an event pulls our emotions awake
⑤ the size of a memory and our perception of time are coupled

① (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)

	


37.

영어	영역	7
39.



(A) When it reaches the top, the bird bends its wings and glides in the direction it wants to travel, searching for the next thermal. All soaring birds take advantage of thermals, but   some   species,   like   the   Broad-winged   Hawk,   are specialists and in the right conditions can travel hundreds of miles with almost no flapping.
(B) Riding updrafts to gain altitude is one of the most conspicuous. Bare ground such as fields or parking lots absorbs more heat from the sun, and as air near the ground warms up it rises.
(C) This  creates  a  column  of  rising  warm  air ― a thermal―  reaching hundreds or even thousands of feet high. A soaring bird can sense the air movement and fly in circles to stay in the column. It simply fans its wings and tail and lets the rising air carry it up like an elevator. [3점]
* aloft: 높이 ** thermal: 상승 온난 기류 *** conspicuous: 뚜렷한



 The era of unicellular life lasted for about three and half billion years, dominating most of the Earth’s history. But around half a billion years ago, during the Cambrian explosion, a diversity of multicellular life including major animal groups emerged in short period. Similarly, calculus was the Cambrian explosion for mathematics. ( ① ) Once it arrived, an amazing diversity of mathematical fields began to evolve. ( ② ) Their lineage  is  visible  in  their  calculus-based  names,  in  adjectives like differential and  integral and  analytic,   as   in   differential                                     geometry, integral equations, and analytic number theory. ( ③ ) These advanced branches of mathematics are like the many branches and  species of multicellular life. ( ④ ) Like unicellular organisms, they dominated the mathematical scene for most of its history. ( ⑤ ) But after the Cambrian explosion of calculus three hundred and fifty years ago, new mathematical life forms began to flourish, and they altered the landscape around them. [3점]
* microbe: 미생물 ** calculus: 미적법 *** lineage: 계보

① (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)

40.다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?



[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Under such circumstances, recycling previously composed music was the only way to make it more durable.
　In the classical period of European music, much musical material  was defacto considered  common  property.  (  ①  )         When  Antonio  Vivaldi  presented  in  Venice  his  opera Rosmira fedele,  the  score was actually a pastiche in which, among his own ideas, musicologists later identified ideas by George Frederic Handel, Giovanni Battista Pergolesi and Johann Adolph Hasse, among others. ( ② ) As far as recycling of segments of music initially written for other occasions into new pieces is concerned, it needs to be observed how today composers are discouraged from doing so for a number of reasons. ( ③ ) A practical one is that each new piece is sure to remain available, in score or as an audio file. ( ④ ) In the 18th century, on the contrary, once the particular occasion for performing a new piece was over, it became almost impossible to ever hear it again. ( ⑤ ) And if new pieces also contained ideas  from  other  composers,  that  would  re-enforce  European musical traditions by increasing the circulation of melodies and harmonic patterns people loved to hear.
*defacto: 사실상  ** pastiche: 혼성곡(混成曲)  *** segment: 부분









According to the experiment above, when given multiple steps to get a treat, toddlers (A) every step of the procedure unlike chimpanzees, because toddlers do not doubt the (B) of each step.
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① complete …… relevance	② complete …… complexity
③ evaluate  …… flexibility	④ rearrange …… variability
⑤ rearrange …… usefulness


	

8	영어	영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.


(B)

 Cheryl was overjoyed and began to practice for her performance. The day of the festival came, and Cheryl arrived at the concert hall with her family. Cheryl could not see, but (b) she could sense the energy of the packed hall. Finally it was her turn to take her position on stage. Terrified, she hesitated to begin her song. But after everything her sister had done to give her this chance, (c) she knew she had to go on.








41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Happens to a Quantity of Liquid in a Sealed Container?
② Molecules: Small but Crucial for the Temperature of Liquid

(C)
 When Cheryl finished singing, the hall was silent for a moment before exploding into applause. She went back home, overwhelmed that her dream was now fulfilled. To add to it all, her sister had recorded the whole performance for her to listen to in the future. Whenever she needed some cheering up, Cheryl listened to the recording, and the thunderous applause acted as a balm for (d) her soul.
(D) 
 Cheryl’s sister promised herself that one day she would make Cheryl’s dream come true. She soon found an opportunity to do so. At the end of the school’s annual festival, there was going to be a grand singing competition for students’ families. Cheryl’s sister applied for it on Cheryl’s behalf, and she was accepted. (e) She went back home and broke the news to Cheryl. Thanks to her sister, Cheryl got the chance to sing in the festival.

43.주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

③ Activate Molecular Movements by Shaking a Water Bottle!
④ The Thicker the Liquid Is, the Less It Evaporates
⑤ How Can We Stop Liquid from Evaporating?

① (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

② (C) - (B) - (D)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)




42.밑줄  친 (a)~(e)  중에서  문맥상  낱말의 쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
 There once was a young blind girl named Cheryl, who lived with her parents and older sister. Her family tried their best to keep her happy despite their financial struggles. But her sister knew Cheryl still felt a sense of emptiness. Cheryl had a passion for music and sang beautifully, yearning to share
(a) her gift with more than just her family. But she thought her dream would not come true.

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는  대상이  나머지  넷과  다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45.윗글의 Cheryl에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 가족의 재정적 어려움이 있었다.
② 가족과 함께 콘서트홀에 도착했다.
③ 노래 시작하기를 망설였다.
④ 노래를 끝낸 후 엄청난 박수를 받았다.
⑤ 노래 경연 대회에 직접 지원했다.


	
2024학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 멸종 위기 동물을 소개하려고
② 동물원 관람 예절을 안내하려고
③ 어린이 동물 캠프를 홍보하려고
④ 신입 동물 훈련사를 모집하려고
⑤ 야생 동물 보호를 독려하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 점심시간에 운동하는 것은 활력과 집중력을 높인다.
② 개인의 건강 상태에 따라 운동 강도를 조절해야 한다.
③ 부상 방지를 위해 올바른 자세로 운동하는 것이 중요하다.
④ 규칙적인 운동은 정서 안정에 도움을 줄 수 있다.
⑤ 과도한 아침 운동은 업무에 방해가 될 수 있다.

3. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  요지로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 정기적인 학습 상담은 학습 능률을 높여 줄 수 있다.
② 메모하는 것은 과제를 관리하는 데 효율적인 방법이다.
③ 자신만의 암기법을 활용하면 성적을 향상시킬 수 있다.
④ 두뇌의 균형적인 발달은 메모하는 습관으로 촉진된다.
⑤ 실천 가능한 계획 수립이 과제 해결의 출발점이다.

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 간식 준비하기	② 유인물 출력하기
③ 학교 체육관 예약하기	④ 강사에게 연락하기
⑤ 배너 배송 일정 확인하기





6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $60	② $63	③ $70	④ $75	⑤ $80

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 콘서트에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 콘서트 티켓을 예매하지 못해서
② 과학 토론 대회에 참가해야 해서
③ 아르바이트 대체 근무자를 찾지 못해서
④ 부모님과 함께 여행을 가야 해서
⑤ 축구 경기에 출전해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Raven Elliott의 책 사인회에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜	② 장소	③ 시작 시간
④ 기념품	⑤ 신청 방법

9. Grandhill Park Cleanup  행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 9월 30일에 열릴 것이다.
② 참가자들은 둘이서 짝을 이루어 쓰레기를 주울 것이다.
③ 유명 인사들이 참가할 것이다.
④ 모든 참가자들은 에코백을 받을 것이다.
⑤ 참가자들은 쓰레기봉투와 장갑을 가져와야 한다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 수강할 스포츠 프로그램을 고르시오.
After-school Sports Programs


①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Why don’t you download the app first?
② I agree! We can open a new pizza place.
③ Really? I wonder why they don’t deliver.
④ That’s great! Can you order the pizza now?
⑤ Okay. I’ll attend the meeting in person then.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s a good idea. You’d better take it.
② Sorry, but you’re not allowed to go outside.
③ Cheer up. We’ll take a trip to the mountains.
④ That’s true. We saw a shooting star last night.
⑤ Don’t worry. I can give you a ride to your school.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Excellent! I’ll see you at 7 p.m. on Sunday.
② I’d appreciate it if you could do that for me.
③ Why not? I want to pick them up right now.
④ Please remember to fix the zipper on time.
⑤ Well done! The repaired pants fit me well.



14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① I know what you mean. You can stay home.
② Absolutely. I would never go barefoot walking.
③ Sounds good to me. Let’s try it this weekend!
④ It’s my fault. I should’ve booked the event earlier.
⑤ I had a nice time there. You should do it.



15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Jack이 Amy에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jack:   	
① No problem. We can reschedule our meeting.
② Don’t be upset. I’ll record the interview for you.
③ Calm down. Did you call the computer service center?
④ I see. We can exchange your laptop for a new one.
⑤ No way. Are you done editing the video clips?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① survival strategies of endangered animals
② impacts of environmental changes on animals’ diet
③ methods animals adopt to make up for lack of sleep
④ hunting patterns used by animals in the wild
⑤ factors that affect animals’ sleep patterns



17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① elephants	② bats	③ sheep
④ lions	⑤ flamingos




18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Parents,
My name is Danielle Hamilton, and I am the principal of Techville High School. As you may know, there is major road construction scheduled to take place in front of our school next month. This raises safety concerns. Therefore, we are asking for parent volunteers to help with directing traffic. The volunteer hours are from 8:00 to 8:30 a.m. and from 4:30 to 5:00 p.m. on school days. If you are willing to take part in the traffic safety volunteer group, please email us with your preferred schedule at info@techville.edu.  Your participation will be helpful in building a safer school environment for our students. Thank you in advance for your contributions.
Sincerely, Danielle Hamilton
① 교통안전 봉사 참여를 요청하려고
② 자원봉사 교육 일정을 공지하려고
③ 학교 시설 공사에 대한 양해를 구하려고
④ 학교 앞 도로 공사의 필요성을 설명하려고
⑤ 등·하교 차량 안전 수칙 준수를 당부하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Nancy의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The day trip to Midtown scheduled for today was canceled because the road leading there was blocked by heavy snow. “Luck just didn’t run my way. Sightseeing in Midtown was why I signed up for this trip ...” Nancy said to herself, with a long sigh. She was thinking of all the interesting sights she wouldn’t be able to enjoy. All of a sudden, there was a knock  at the door. “News! We are going to the Pland Zoo near the hotel. We will meet in the lobby soon.” It was the voice of her tour guide. She sprung off the couch and started putting on her coat in a hurry. “The Pland Zoo! That’s on my bucket list! What a turn of fortune!” shouted Nancy.
① disappointed → excited	② relieved  → anxious
③ surprised	→ annoyed	④ ashamed → grateful
⑤ indifferent	→ amazed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Confident is not the same as comfortable. One of the biggest misconceptions about becoming self-confident is that it means living fearlessly. The key to building confidence is quite the opposite. It means we are willing to let fear be present as we do the things that matter to us. When we establish  some self-confidence in something, it feels good. We want to  stay there and hold on to it. But if we only go where we feel confident, then confidence never expands beyond that. If  we only do the things we know we can do well, fear of the new and unknown tends to grow. Building confidence inevitably demands that we make friends with vulnerability because it is the  only way to be without confidence for a while. But the only way confidence can grow is when we are willing to be without it. When we can step into fear and sit with the unknown, it is the courage of doing so that builds confidence from the ground up.
* vulnerability: 취약성
① 적성을 파악하기 위해서는 자신 있는 일을 다양하게 시도해야 한다.
② 자신감을 키우기 위해 낯설고 두려운 일에 도전하는 용기를 가져야 한다.
③ 어려운 일을 자신 있게 수행하기 위해 사전에 계획을 철저히 세워야 한다.
④ 과도한 자신감을 갖기보다는 자신의 약점을 객관적으로 분석해야 한다.
⑤ 자신의 경험과 지식을 바탕으로 당면한 문제에 자신 있게 대처해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 “The best is the enemy of the good.”이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Gold plating in the project means needlessly enhancing the expected results, namely, adding characteristics that are costly, not required, and that have low added value with respect to the targets ― in other words, giving more with no real justification other than to demonstrate one’s own talent. Gold plating is especially interesting for project team members, as it is typical of projects with a marked professional component ― in other words, projects that involve specialists with proven experience and extensive professional autonomy. In these environments specialists often see the project as an opportunity to test and enrich their skill sets. There is therefore a strong temptation, in all good faith, to engage in gold plating, namely, to achieve more or higher-quality work that gratifies the professional but does not add value to the client’s requests, and at the same time removes valuable resources from the project. As the saying goes, “The best is the enemy of the good.”
* autonomy: 자율성 ** gratify: 만족시키다
① Pursuing perfection at work causes conflicts among teammembers.
② Raising work quality only to prove oneself is not desirable.
③ Inviting overqualified specialists to a project leads to bad ends.
④ Responding to the changing needs of clients is unnecessary.
⑤ Acquiring a range of skills for a project does not ensure success.






22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The need to assimilate values and lifestyle of the host culture has become a growing conflict. Multiculturalists  suggest  that there should be  a model of partial assimilation in which immigrants retain some of their customs, beliefs, and language. There is pressure to conform rather than to maintain their cultural identities, however, and these conflicts are greatly determined by the community to which one migrates. These experiences are not new; many Europeans experienced exclusion and poverty during the first two waves of immigration in the 19th and 20th centuries. Eventually, these immigrants transformed this country with significant changes that included enlightenment and acceptance of diversity. People of color, however, continue to struggle for acceptance. Once again, the challenge is to recognize that other cultures think and act differently and that they have the right to do so. Perhaps, in the not too distant future, immigrants will no  longer be strangers among us.
① 이민자 고유의 정체성을 유지할 권리에 대한 공동체의 인식이 필요하다.
② 이민자의 적응을 돕기 위해 그들의 요구를 반영한 정책 수립이 중요하다.
③ 이민자는 미래 사회의 긍정적 변화에 핵심적 역할을 수행할 수 있다.
④ 다문화 사회의 안정을 위해서는 국제적 차원의 지속적인 협력이 요구된다.
⑤ 문화적 동화는 장기적이고 체계적인과정을 통해 점진적으로 이루어진다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The primary purpose of commercial music radio broadcasting is to deliver an audience to a group of advertisers and sponsors. To achieve commercial success, that audience must be as large as possible. More than any other characteristics (such as demographic or psychographic profile, purchasing power, level of interest, degree of satisfaction, quality of attention or emotional state), the quantity of an audience aggregated as a mass is the most significant metric for broadcasters seeking to make music radio for profitable ends. As a result, broadcasters attempt to maximise their audience size by playing music that is popular, or ― at the very least ― music that can be relied upon not to cause audiences to switch off their radio or change the station. Audience retention is a key value (if not the key value) for many music programmers and for radio station management. In consequence, a high degree of risk aversion frequently marks out the ‘successful’ radio music  programmer. Playlists are restricted, and often very small.
* aggregate: 모으다 ** aversion: 싫어함
① features of music playlists appealing to international audiences
② influence of advertisers on radio audiences’ musical preferences
③ difficulties of increasing audience size in radio music programmes
④ necessity of satisfying listeners’diverse needs in the radio business
⑤ outcome of music radio businesses’attempts toattract largeaudiences





24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Before the web, newspaper archives were largely the musty domain of professional researchers and journalism students. Journalism was, by definition, current. The general accessibility of archives has greatly extended the shelf life of journalism, with older stories now regularly cited to provide context for more current ones. With regard to how meaning is made of complex issues encountered in the news, this departure can be understood as a readiness by online news consumers to engage with the underlying issues and contexts of the news that was not apparent in, or even possible for, print consumers. One of the emergent qualities of online news, determined in part by the depth of readily accessible online archives, seems to be the possibility of understanding news stories as the manifest outcomes of larger economic, social and cultural issues rather than short-lived and unconnected media spectacles.
* archive: 기록 보관소 ** musty: 곰팡내 나는 *** manifest: 분명한
① Web-based Journalism: Lasting Longer and Contextually Wider
② With the Latest Content, Online News Beats Daily Newspapers!
③ How Online Media Journalists Reveal Hidden Stories Behind News
④ Let’s Begin a Journey to the Past with Printed Newspapers!
⑤ Present and Future of Journalism in the Web World


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Brushwood National Park Tour Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?














　The table above shows the college enrollment rates of 18- to 24-year-olds from five racial/ethnic groups in the U.S.  in  2011, 2016, and 2021. ① Among the five groups, Asians exhibited the highest college enrollment rate with more than 50% in each year listed in the table. ② Whites were the  second highest in terms of the college enrollment rate among all the groups in all three years, while the rate dropped below 40% in 2021. ③ The college enrollment rates of both Blacks and Hispanics were higher than 35% but lower than 40% in 2011 and in 2021. ④ Among the years displayed in the table, 2016 was the only year when the college enrollment rate of Hispanics was higher than that of Blacks. ⑤ In each year, American Indians/Alaska Natives showed the lowest college enrollment rate.



26. Charles Rosen에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Charles Rosen, a virtuoso pianist and distinguished writer, was born in New York in 1927. Rosen displayed a remarkable talent for the piano from his early childhood. In 1951, the year
he earned his doctoral degree in French literature at Princeton University, Rosen made both his New York  piano debut and  his first recordings. To glowing praise, he appeared in numerous recitals and orchestral concerts around the world. Rosen’s performances impressed some of the 20th century’s most well-known composers, who invited him to play their music. Rosen was also the author of many widely admired books about music. His most famous book, The Classical Style, was first published in 1971 and won the U.S. National Book Award the next year. This work, which was reprinted in an expanded edition in 1997, remains a landmark in the field. While writing extensively, Rosen continued to perform as a pianist for the  rest of his life until he died in 2012.
① 어려서부터 피아노에 재능을 보였다.
② 프랑스 문학으로 박사 학위를 받았다.
③ 유명 작곡가들로부터 그들의 작품 연주를 요청받았다.
④ The Classical Style이 처음으로 출판되고 다음 해에 상을 받았다.
⑤ 피아니스트 활동을 중단하고 글쓰기에 매진하였다.

Brushwood National Park Tour Program
　Walking in nature is a great way to stay fit and healthy. Enjoy free park walks with our volunteer guides, while appreciating the beautiful sights and sounds of the forest.
Details
?Open on weekdays from March to November
?Easy walk along the path for one hour (3 km)
?Groups of 15 to 20 per guide
Registration
?Scan the QR code to sign up for the tour.
Note
?A bottle of water will be provided to each participant.
?Children under 12 must be accompanied by an adult.
?Tours may be canceled due to weather conditions.
※ If you have any questions, please email us at brushwoodtour@parks.org.

① 자원봉사 안내자가 동행한다.
② 주말에 진행된다.
③ QR  코드를 스캔하여 신청한다.
④ 각 참가자에게 물이 한 병씩 제공될 것이다.
⑤ 날씨에 따라 취소될 수 있다.



28. WGHS Geography Photo Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

WGHS Geography Photo Contest
　The event you’ve been waiting for all this year is finally here! Please join Wood Gate High School’s 10th annual Geography Photo Contest.
Guidelines
Participants should use the theme of the “Beauty of Rivers Crossing Our City.”
Submissions are limited to one photo per person.
Files should not be larger than 50 MB.
Schedule

WhenWhereSubmissionOctober 2－October 8       Email: geography@woodgate.eduVotingOctober 11－October 13   School Website: https://www.woodgate.eduExhibitionOctober 16－October 20Main LobbyNote
The top 10 photos selected by students will be exhibited.
※ For more information, visit the geography teacher’s room.

① 처음으로 개최되는 대회이다.
② 출품 사진 주제에 제한이 없다.
③ 100 MB  크기의 파일을 제출할 수 있다.
④ 투표는 일주일간 실시된다.
⑤ 학생들이 선정한 사진들이 전시될 것이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Viewing the stress response as a resource can transform the physiology of fear into the biology of courage. It can turn a threat into a challenge and can help you ① do your best under pressure. Even when the stress doesn’t feel helpful ― as in the case of anxiety ― welcoming it can transform ② it into something that is helpful: more energy, more  confidence,  and a greater willingness to take action. You can  apply  this strategy in your own life anytime you notice signs of stress.

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. In the post-World War II years after 1945, unparalleled economic growth fueled a building boom and a massive migration from the central cities to the new suburban areas. The suburbs were far more dependent on the automobile, signaling the shift from primary dependence on public transportation to private cars. Soon this led to the construction of better highways and freeways and the decline and even loss of  public  transportation.  With  all  of  these  changes  came  a

When you feel your heart beating or your breath quickening,	 	of leisure. As more people owned their

③ realizing that it is your body’s way of trying to give you more energy. If you notice tension in your body, remind yourself ④ that the stress response gives you access to your strength. Sweaty palms? Remember what it felt like ⑤ to go on your first date ― palms sweat when you’re close to something you want.
* physiology: 생리 기능

own homes, with more space inside and lovely yards outside, their recreation and leisure time was increasingly centered around the home or, at most, the neighborhood. One major activity of this home-based leisure was watching television.  No longer did one have to ride the trolly to the  theater to watch a movie; similar entertainment was available for  free and more conveniently from television.


① downfall
② uniformity
③ restoration
④ privatization
⑤ customization

* unparalleled: 유례없는








30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Why is the value of place so important? From a historical perspective, until the 1700s textile production was a hand process using the fibers available within a ① particular geographic region, for example, cotton, wool, silk, and flax. Trade among regions ② increased the availability of these fibers and associated textiles made from the fibers. The First Industrial Revolution and subsequent technological advancements in manufactured fibers ③ added to the fact that fibers and textiles were no longer “place-bound.” Fashion companies created and consumers could acquire textiles and products made from textiles with little or no connection to where, how, or by whom the products were made. This ④ countered a disconnect between consumers and the products they use on a daily basis, a loss of understanding and appreciation in the skills and resources necessary to create these products, and an associated disregard for the human and natural resources necessary for the products’ creation. Therefore, renewing a value on place ⑤ reconnects the company and the consumer with the people, geography, and culture of a  particular location.
* textile: 직물





32. Many people create and share pictures and videos on the Internet. The difficulty is finding what you want. Typically, people want to search using words (rather than, say, example sketches). Because most pictures don’t come with words attached, it is natural to try and build tagging systems that tag images with relevant words. The underlying machinery is straightforward ― we apply image classification and object detection methods and tag the image with the output words. But tags aren’t 	. It matters who is doing what, and tags don’t capture this. For example, tagging a picture of a cat in the street with the object categories “cat”, “street”, “trash can” and “fish bones” leaves out the information that the cat is pulling the fish bones out of an open trash can on the street.
① a set of words that allow users to identify an individual object
② a comprehensive description of what is happening in an image
③ a reliable resource for categorizing information by pictures
④ a primary means of organizing a sequential order of words
⑤ a useful filter for sorting similar but not identical images


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. An invention or discovery that is too far ahead of its time is worthless; no one can follow. Ideally, an innovation opens up only the next step from what is known and invites the culture to move forward one hop. An overly futuristic, unconventional, or visionary invention can fail initially (it may lack essential not-yet-invented materials or a critical market or proper understanding) yet succeed later, when the ecology of supporting ideas catches up. Gregor Mendel’s 1865 theories of genetic heredity were correct but ignored for 35 years. His sharp insights were not accepted because they did not explain the problems biologists had at the time, nor did his explanation operate by known mechanisms, so his discoveries were out of reach even for the early adopters. Decades later science faced the urgent questions that Mendel’s discoveries could answer. Now his insights 	. Within a few years of one another, three different scientists each independently rediscovered Mendel’s forgotten work, which of course had been there all along. [3점]
* ecology: 생태 환경 ** heredity: 유전
① caught up to modern problems
② raised even more questions
③ addressed past and current topics alike
④ were only one step away
⑤ regained acceptance of the public


34. Prior to photography, 	. While painters have always lifted particular places out of their ‘dwelling’ and transported them elsewhere, paintings were time-consuming to produce, relatively difficult to transport and one-of-a-kind. The multiplication of photographs especially took place with the introduction of the half-tone plate in  the 1880s that made possible the  mechanical reproduction of photographs in newspapers, periodicals, books and advertisements. Photography became coupled to consumer capitalism and the globe was now offered ‘in limitless quantities, figures, landscapes, events which had not previously been utilised either at all, or only as pictures for one customer’. With capitalism’s arrangement of the world as a ‘department store’, ‘the proliferation and circulation of representations ... achieved a spectacular and virtually inescapable global magnitude’. Gradually photographs became cheap mass- produced objects that made the world visible, aesthetic and desirable. Experiences were ‘democratised’ by translating them into cheap images. Light, small and mass-produced photographs became dynamic vehicles for the spatiotemporal circulation of places. [3점]
* proliferation: 확산 ** magnitude: (큰) 규모 *** aesthetic: 미적인
① paintings alone connected with nature
② painting was the major form of art
③ art held up a mirror to the world
④ desire for travel was not strong
⑤ places did not travel well
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Although organizations are offering telecommuting programs in greater numbers than ever before, acceptance and use of these programs are still limited by a number of factors. ① These factors include manager reliance on face-to-face management practices, lack of telecommuting training within an organization, misperceptions of and discomfort with flexible workplace programs, and a lack of information about the effects of telecommuting on an organization’s bottom line. ② Despite these limitations, at the beginning of the 21st century, a new “anytime, anywhere” work culture is emerging. ③ Care must be taken to select employees whose personal and working characteristics are best suited for telecommuting. ④ Continuing advances in information technology, the expansion of a global workforce, and increased desire to balance work and family are only three of the many factors that will gradually reduce the current barriers to telecommuting as a dominant workforce development. ⑤ With implications for organizational cost savings, especially with regard to lower facility costs, increased employee flexibility, and productivity, telecommuting is increasingly of interest to many organizations.
* telecommute: (컴퓨터로) 집에서 근무하다

[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) Intuitively and quickly, we mentally sort things into groups based on what we perceive the differences between them to be, and that is the basis for stereotyping. Only afterwards do we examine (or not examine) more evidence of how things are differentiated, and the degree and significance of the variations.
(B) Our brain performs these tasks efficiently and automatically, usually without our awareness. The real danger of stereotypes is not their inaccuracy, but their lack of flexibility and their tendency to be preserved, even when we have enough time to stop and consider.
(C) For most people, the word stereotype arouses negative connotations: it implies a negative bias. But, in fact, stereotypes do not differ in principle from all other generalizations; generalizations about groups of  people are not necessarily always negative.
* intuitive: 직관적인 ** connotation: 함축
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) In contrast, plants with a history of nutrient abundance are risk averse and save energy. At all developmental stages, plants respond to environmental changes or unevenness so as to be able to use their energy for growth, survival, and reproduction, while limiting damage and nonproductive uses of their valuable energy.
(B) Research in this area has shown that plants are constantly aware of their position in the environment, in terms of  both space and time. Plants that have experienced variable nutrient availability in the past tend to exhibit risk-taking behaviors, such as spending energy on root lengthening instead of leaf production.
(C) But if a plant does not have a caretaker to provide supplemental minerals, it can proliferate or lengthen its roots and develop root hairs to allow foraging in more distant soil patches. Plants can also use their memory to respond to histories of temporal or spatial variation in nutrient or resource availability. [3점]
* nutrient: 영양소 ** fertilizer: 비료 *** forage: 구하러 다니다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Acknowledging the making of artworks does not require a detailed, technical knowledge of, say, how painters mix different kinds of paint, or how an image editing tool works.   ( ① ) All that is required is a general sense of a significant difference between working with paints and working with an imaging application. ( ② ) This sense might involve a basic familiarity with paints and paintbrushes as well as a basic familiarity with how we use computers, perhaps including how we use consumer imaging apps. ( ③ ) This is because every kind of artistic material or tool comes with its own challenges and affordances for artistic creation. ( ④ ) Critics are often interested in the ways artists exploit different kinds of materials and tools for particular artistic effect. ( ⑤ ) They are also interested in the success of an artist’s attempt ― embodied in the artwork itself ― to push the limits of what can be achieved with certain materials and tools. [3점]
* affordance: 행위유발성 ** exploit: 활용하다


40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The shift from analog to digital technology significantly influenced how music was produced. First and foremost, the digitization of sounds ― that is, their conversion into numbers ― enabled music makers to undo what was done. ( ① ) One could, in other words, twist and bend sounds toward  something new without sacrificing the original version. ( ② ) This “undo” ability made mistakes considerably less momentous, sparking the creative process and encouraging a  generally  more experimental mindset. ( ③ ) In addition, digitally converted sounds could be manipulated simply by programming digital messages rather than using physical tools, simplifying the editing process significantly. ( ④ ) For example, while editing once involved razor blades to physically cut and splice audiotapes, it now involved the cursor and mouse-click of the computer-based sequencer program, which was obviously less time consuming. (  ⑤ )  This microlevel access at once made  it easier to conceal any traces of manipulations (such as  joining tracks in silent spots) and introduced new possibilities for manipulating sounds in audible and experimental ways.
* binary: 2진법의 ** splice: 합쳐 잇다












(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① insignificant …… delay	② insufficient …… enrich
③ concrete	…… enhance	④ outdated	…… improve
⑤ limited	…… disturb


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 










41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Learned Nothing in School?: How Memory Tricks You
② Why We Forget Selectively: Credibility of Content
③ The Constant Battle Between Content and Context
④ How Students Can Learn More and Better in School
⑤ Shift Your Focus from Who to What for Memory Building



42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)






43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Sean은 친구 Alex에게 어려움을 토로했다.
② Toby가 큰 연못으로 달려갔다.
③ 밤이 되자 바람이 잦아들었다.
④ Sean은 산을 내려오며 기쁨을 느꼈다.
⑤ Sean은 Vincent Mountain  하이킹에 대해 읽은 적이 있다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2023학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1



1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 행사에 참여하는 회사 명단을 공개하려고
② 참가자에게 박람회 장소 변경을 공지하려고
③ 자기소개서 작성 시 유의 사항을 전달하려고
④ 신입 사원 채용을 위한 면접 절차를 설명하려고
⑤ 취업 박람회에 가지고 가야 할 것을 안내하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자원 낭비를 줄이기 위해 옷을 재활용해야 한다.
② 옷장 정리 시 잘 입지 않는 옷을 처분해야 한다.
③ 유행을 덜 타는 디자인의 옷을 구매해야 한다.
④ 자주 입는 옷을 옷장 문 쪽에 배치해야 한다.
⑤ 비슷한 색깔끼리 옷을 정리해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건축가 ? 의뢰인	② 집주인 ? 사진사
③ 임대인 ? 세입자	④ 기자 ? 잡지사 편집장
⑤ 고객 ? 이삿짐센터 직원

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
7. 
대화를 듣고, 남자가 반려동물 박람회에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.

① 가족 여행을 떠나야 해서
② 반려동물을 입양해야 해서
③ 액세서리를 사러 가야 해서
④ 과학 프로젝트에 참여해야 해서
⑤ 반려견에게 예방 접종을 해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, International Game Conference에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 기간	② 장소	③ 강의 주제
④ 티켓 가격	⑤ 기념품

9. Superhero Museum에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 7만 권이 넘는 만화책을 보유하고 있다.
② 시립 도서관 옆에 위치하고 있다.
③ 슈퍼히어로 의상을 대여해 준다.
④ 취학 연령 미만의 아동에게 무료 입장권을 준다.
⑤ 생일에 방문한 고객에게 음료 쿠폰을 제공한다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 손 세정제를 고르시오.
Hand Soap


①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.







5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 방송 부탁하기	② 간식 주문하기
③ 포스터 게시하기	④ 지원서 출력하기
⑤ QR 코드 제작하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $30	② $36	③ $40	④ $45	⑤ $50

① The soccer match is going to start in 30 minutes.
② I’m disappointed that all the chicken was sold out.
③ No matter how much we hurry, it’ll take about an hour.
④ Seating is available on a first come, first served basis.
⑤ Your order was cancelled due to a delivery problem.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① No problem. I can do that for you.
② Sorry. I’m not able to give you a ride.
③ Definitely. He’s already arrived there.
④ Sure. You can take him to the ice rink.
⑤ Cheer up. Your presentation will be great.




2	영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Man:  	

① All right. Then I’ll wait for him to return.
② Stay calm. I know where he might be now.
③ Believe me. He’ll come back before the deadline.
④ Never mind. He’s already registered for the class.
⑤ No worries. The results of the consultation were fine.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

Woman:  	

① I’m sorry. I’m tired of having music practice every day.
② Okay. I’ll try to find something new to challenge myself.
③ Absolutely. You’ll be good at playing the ukulele one day.
④ You’re right. I’d better stay away from relationship stress.
⑤ I agree. You should put more effort into the work you’re doing.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emma가 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Emma:  	

① Could you check whether I got double charged?
② Can I get a discount coupon via message again?
③ Would it be okay for me to use your cell phone?
④ Did you insert your credit card to the card reader?
⑤ Is it possible to get a refund through a bank transfer?


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① practical methods of conflict management
② socially acceptable ways to express anger
③ various behaviors to trigger social conflict
④ communicative skills for customer satisfaction
⑤ situations causing conflict between generations


17. 언급된 전략이 아닌 것은?
① accommodating	② compromising	③ competing
④ assessing	⑤ avoiding


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 계약 절차에 대한 이의를 제기하려고
② 우수한 학생을 인턴 채용에 추천하려고
③ 학생회장 선거 운영 방법을 문의하려고
④ 법률 회사의 유능한 변호사를 소개하려고
⑤ 법학 전문 대학원의 교육 과정을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jerry의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? “5,000 dollars has been deposited? Thank you. I’ll check it out
now.” Jerry Shaw hung up with a smile on his face. Humming, he headed to the bank to withdraw some cash. He stopped at the ATM, inserted the card and entered his PIN. The screen flashed the message, “Card not valid ― please see a teller.” What? My bonus was deposited just now! Entering the bank, Jerry told the teller what had happened. She studied the screen and frowned. “Mr. Shaw, your account was closed. All your funds were withdrawn when you closed it,” she said. “What do you mean? I never did! It must be identity theft!” yelled Jerry, his voice barely under control.
① delighted → panicked ② anxious → envious
③ sympathetic → exhausted ④ grateful → indifferent
⑤ confused → enthusiastic
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Anthropology has become relevant for addressing global issues. This is not to deny the vital role of ‘hard’ sciences in addressing these problems. However, if we are to solve global problems we need a new way of thinking based in humanities and social sciences. It is impossible to resolve global issues merely by looking at numbers and statistics. Anthropology thus becomes crucial, as a discipline and a profession enabling the collection and interpretation of ‘thick data’ ― in addition to ‘big data’ ― and helps us to understand the world we live in more comprehensively. Why is a brand new and expensive ‘smart’ building a disaster? What will happen in the future with passenger cars? In answering such questions, we should stop relying only on quantitative data analytics; instead, the most important decisions should also be informed by anthropological qualitative approaches which provide a more complete and nuanced picture of people’s lives.
① 광범위한 규모의 문제를 다룰 때는 처리 단계를 세분화해야 한다.
② 실증적 자료를 토대로 해결할 수 있는 문제를 먼저 처리해야 한다.
③ 글로벌 문제 해결을 위해 인류학의 질적 접근법을 활용해야 한다.
④ 전 인류적 문제에 대한 질적 연구는 정량화된 수치에 기반해야 한다.
⑤ 사회 문제의 포괄적 이해를 위해 자료를 반복적으로 검증해야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 it’s an angry protest from the brain’s reward system이
다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

　Our brains light up when our predicted reality and actual reality match. Our brains love to be right. We also don’t like to be wrong, and we feel threatened when our stereotyped predictions don’t come true. Psychologist Wendy Mendes asked White and Asian college students to interact with Latino students who had been hired as actors by the researchers. Some of the Latino students portrayed themselves as socioeconomically “high status,” with lawyer fathers, professor mothers, and summers spent volunteering in Europe. Others portrayed themselves as “low status,” with unemployed parents and part-time summer jobs. The researchers found that when participants interacted with the Latino students who appeared to come from wealth and thus challenged American stereotypes, they responded physiologically as if to a threat: their blood vessels constricted and their heart activity changed. In these interactions, participants also saw the students who violated stereotypes as less likable. In this way, stereotypes that are descriptive can easily become prescriptive. The phenomenon, it turns out, may have a neuroscientific explanation: it’s an angry protest from the brain’s reward system.
① Our brain prefers actual reality to predicted reality.
② Humans have a tendency to deny that they are stereotyped.
③ Humans are conditioned to avoid people who resemble them.
④ Our brain dislikes when something goes against its prediction.
⑤ When dissatisfied, the brain operates to make itself feel better.






22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We can imagine natural numbers as whole objects, things our hunter-gatherer brains can work with. On the other hand, partial numbers ― decimals, fractions, percentages, and ratios
― simply don’t register as real to our minds. We may be able to work with them for a given time when we’re in math mode, but if we’re asked questions at other times, we tend to have trouble grasping the concept. In other words, any time we give our audience figures that aren’t natural numbers, the message is unlikely to make sense to them. Not only are they prone to make errors remembering and calculating the numbers, but there’s a good chance they never even envision what we’re describing in the first place ― because the number attached isn’t solid. Use natural numbers whenever you can to make your message real. For numbers less than 1, you can use a strategy to make things start to show up as natural numbers. If you find that 0.2% of people have a certain trait, using “1 out of 500” makes this abstract percentage into a real thing.
① 근사치를 사용하면 정보를 신속하게 처리할 수 있다.
② 복잡한 계산에서 단위를 통일하는 것이 혼동을 방지한다.
③ 수학 기호의 사용이 효과적인 정보 전달을 가능하게 한다.
④ 자연수로 수치가 표현될 때 메시지가 실재적으로 전달된다.
⑤ 메시지에 소수 표현을 포함하는 것은 내용의 신뢰도를 높여 준다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Facing large-scale, long-term change can seem overwhelming. Problems like global contagion or economic inequality are so complex that it can be hard to believe any intervention might make a difference. Working through fears of what could be depends on connecting with the abstract. Linking issues like climate change, for example, with the realities of our own neighborhoods, jobs, and relationships, translates conceptual ideas into concrete emotions. Thinking of how the beaches we love might disappear, how more frequent floods might destroy our homes, or how we might have to move to flee mounting wildfire risk, evokes feelings like anger, sadness, or guilt ― feelings that inspire us to act. A recent study found that when people feel personally affected by potential climatic change, they are more likely to support carbon reduction efforts and push for proactive policies. Forming emotional connections to potential futures helps us move from denial and despair to action.
① effectiveness of making remote problems personal
② impacts of negative tone in news on problem solving
③ contribution of experts to solving large-scale problems
④ limits of personal intervention in minimizing climate change
⑤ risks of attempting to predict events with limited information








24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There was once a certain difficulty with the moons of Jupiter that is worth remarking on. These satellites were studied very carefully by Roemer, who noticed that the moons sometimes seemed to be ahead of schedule, and sometimes behind. They were ahead when Jupiter was particularly close to the earth and they were behind when Jupiter was farther from the earth. This would have been a very difficult thing to explain according to the law of gravitation. If a law does not work even in one place where it ought to, it is just wrong. But the reason for this discrepancy was very simple and beautiful: it takes a little while to see the moons of Jupiter because of the time it takes light to travel from Jupiter to the earth. When Jupiter is closer to the earth the time is a little less, and when it is farther from the earth, the time is more. This is why moons appear to be, on the average, a little ahead or a little behind, depending on whether they are closer to or farther from the earth.
* discrepancy: 불일치

① The Difficulty of Proving the Gravitational Law
② An Illusion Created by the Shadow of the Moon
③ Why Aren’t Jupiter’s Moons Observed Where They Should Be?
④ Obstacles in Measuring Light’s Speed: Limits of Past Technology
⑤ Ahead and Behind: Moons Change Their Position by Themselves




4	영어 영역

25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above shows the number of dementia patients per 1,000 inhabitants in six European countries in 2021 and in 2050 (The number in 2050 is estimated). ① By 2050, the number of dementia patients per 1,000 people is expected to increase by more than 10 in all given countries compared to 2021. ② In 2021, Italy recorded the highest proportion of dementia patients out of the six countries and it is expected to do so in 2050 as well. ③ The proportion of dementia patients in Spain was lower than that of Germany in 2021, but is expected to exceed that of Germany in 2050. ④ Switzerland and the Netherlands had the same proportion of dementia patients in 2021, and by 2050 those proportions are both projected to more than double. ⑤ Among the six countries, Belgium shows the smallest gap between the number of dementia patients per 1,000 inhabitants in 2021 and in 2050.
* dementia: 치매



26. Josef Frank에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Josef Frank, born in Austria of Jewish heritage, studied architecture at the Vienna University of Technology. He then taught at the Vienna School of Arts and Crafts from 1919 to 1925. He founded an interior design firm together with some architect colleagues in 1925. He was one of early Vienna modernism’s most important figures, but already in the beginning of the 1920s he started to question modernism’s growing pragmatism. He had little appreciation for the French architect Le Corbusier’s belief that a house should be “a machine for living in.” He was against the standardized interior design trend of the time, fearing that it would make people all too uniform. He moved to Sweden with his Swedish wife in 1933 to escape growing Nazi discrimination and gained citizenship in 1939. He was the most prestigious designer at his Stockholm design company. In addition to his architectural work he created numerous designs for furniture, fabric, wallpaper and carpet.
27. 
2023 Idea Sharing Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?

① 개인으로 참가할 수 없다.
② 7분짜리 영상을 웹사이트에 게시해야 한다.
③ 환경을 보호할 수 있는 방법을 영상에 넣어야 한다.
④ 심사 기준에 창의성이 포함된다.
⑤ 수상 팀은 이메일을 통해 안내될 것이다.

28. International Mask Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하는 것은?

* pragmatism: 실용주의

① Vienna University of Technology에서 건축학을 공부했다.
② 건축가 동료들과 함께 인테리어 디자인 회사를 설립했다.
③ 초기 비엔나 모더니즘의 가장 중요한 인물 중 한 명이었다.
④ 당시의 표준화된 인테리어 디자인 경향을 옹호했다.
⑤ 나치의 차별을 피해 스웨덴으로 가서 시민권을 얻었다.



① 화요일에는 축제가 운영되지 않는다.
② 가면 만들기 활동은 예약 없이 참여할 수 있다.
③ 오디오 가이드는 입장료에 포함되지 않는다.
④ 만든 가면은 기념품으로 집에 가져갈 수 있다.
⑤ 관련 문의는 전화로만 가능하다.






29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]

영어 영역	5
[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

　Providing feedback to students is a critical task of teachers. General psychology has shown that knowledge of results is necessary for improving a skill. Advanced musicians are able to self-critique their performances, but developing music students
① rely on teachers to supply evaluative feedback. The most constructive feedback is that ② which expresses the discrepancies between a student’s performance of a piece of music and an optimal version. Expert teachers give more detailed feedback than general appraisals, and music educators generally recognize that more specific teacher feedback facilitates student performance improvement. Researchers also have explored ③ whether the feedback of effective teachers is more often positively or negatively expressed, that is, constituting praise or criticism. One might intuitively think that positive comments are more ④ motivated to students and, as a result, are more associated with effective teaching. The research, however, paints a slightly different picture. Although positive feedback is ⑤ likely more helpful with younger learners and in one-on-one instruction, more advanced music students seem to accept and benefit from greater levels of criticism in lessons.











30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

　How do hormones trigger reactions in the body? When a hormone is released from a gland, it travels in the bloodstream through the body in search of its ① target. Organs, tissues and other glands in the body have receptor sites that hormones must bind to in order to deliver their message and cause an effect. But because every hormone has its own unique shape, they are designed to act only on the parts of the body that have a receptor site with the ② corresponding shape. This mode of action can be likened to a lock and key mechanism ― if the key doesn’t fit the lock, then nothing will happen. When a hormone binds to its receptor, it sets off a chain of other signaling pathways to create a ③ change in the body. Once the desired effect has taken place and there is too much hormone circulating in the blood, this signal is fed back to the glands to
④ boost further hormone release. This is called a feedback loop and, when functioning correctly, it allows the endocrine system to ⑤ ensure the conditions in your body remain in balance.
* gland: (분비)선 ** endocrine system: 내분비계
31. 
Although a balance or harmony between partners clearly
develops over time in a relationship, it is also a factor in initial
attraction and interest in a partner. That is, to the extent that two people share similar verbal and nonverbal habits in a first meeting, they will be more comfortable with one another. For example, fast-paced individuals talk and move quickly and are more expressive, whereas slow-paced individuals have a different tempo and are less expressive. Initial interactions between people at opposite ends of such a continuum may be more difficult than those between similar types. In the case of contrasting styles, individuals may be less interested in pursuing a relationship than if they were similar in interaction styles. Individuals with similar styles, however, are more comfortable and find that they just seem to “click” with one another. Thus, 	may provide a selection filter for the initiation of a relationship.
① information deficit
② cultural adaptability
③ meaning negotiation
④ behavioral coordination
⑤ unconditional acceptance








32. Animals arguably make art. The male bowerbirds of New Guinea and Australia dedicate huge fractions of their time and
energy to creating elaborate structures from twigs, flowers, berries, beetle wings, and even colorful trash. These are the backdrops to their complex mating dances, which include acrobatic moves and even imitations of other species. What’s most amazing about the towers and “bowers” they construct is that they aren’t stereotyped like a beehive or hummingbird nest. Each one is different. Artistic skill, along with fine craftsbirdship, is rewarded by the females. Many researchers suggest these displays are used by the females to gauge the cognitive abilities of her potential mates, but Darwin thought that she was actually attracted to their beauty. In other words, the bowers 	; they are appreciated by the females for their own sake, much as we appreciate a painting or a bouquet of spring flowers. A 2013 study looked at whether bowerbirds that did better on cognitive tests were more successful at attracting mates. They were not, suggesting whatever the females are looking for, it isn’t a straightforward indicator of cognitive ability.
① block any possibility of reproduction
② aren’t simply signals of mate quality
③ hardly sustain their forms long enough
④ don’t let the mating competition overheat
⑤ can be a direct indicator of aggressiveness




6	영어 영역

33. Running a business that sells goods and services to
consumers requires getting to know the products they
like.	More	than	that,	however,	you	want	to
 	. In traditional or online sales, people are bound to favorably regard the vendor and product that they could easily inquire about and quickly acquire in good order. Using the product can increase or decrease their satisfaction, and they will remember to repurchase products that meet and exceed their expectations. Traditional stores make the shopping experience pleasant by their displays and personal service. Internet retailers lead buyers to products they want through speedy searches and clicks. A new online selling method that can generate millions of dollars in purchases within a few minutes is livestream selling. That’s when hosts streaming their shows live demonstrate a product and even interactively receive comments and answer questions from their viewers through the power of social media. If they like the product, they buy it immediately through an e-commerce feature on the platform. Buyers say that the experience is so convenient, it is like talking to a friend. [3점]
① provide rare items that can draw others’ eyes
② maximize the profit through competitive incentives
③ link positive experiences to the products they purchase
④ examine the current state of digital marketing technologies
⑤ convince yourself the product is a must-have in their lives





34. In Hegel’s philosophy, even though there is interaction and interrelation between the universal and the individual,
 	. For Hegel, individuals are not distinguished in terms of Reason. In Philosophy of Right Hegel stresses particularity and universality as follows: “A man, who acts perversely, exhibits particularity. The rational is the highway on which everyone travels, and no one is specially marked.” Here, Hegel maintains that individuals can be differentiated from each other in terms of their acts but they are not differentiated with respect to reason. There are specific thoughts, but they are finally resolved into the universal. One might say that Hegel seems to focus on the individual like Aristotle but in reality, he subtly treats the universal as fundamental whereas Aristotle considers the individual as primary substance and universal as secondary substance; in so doing Aristotle emphasizes the universal to be subordinate to the individual in contrast to Hegel. [3점]
* perversely: 별나게

① an individual stands alone apart from the universe
② the universal still has more priority than the individual
③ universal truth cannot be the key to individual problems
④ individuals can’t deduce universal principles from reality itself
⑤ every individual should have his or her own particular universe
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　One of the branches of postmodernism examines the structure of language and how it is used. It challenges the assumption that language can be precisely used to represent reality. ① Meanings of words are ambiguous, as words are only signs or labels given to concepts (what is signified) and therefore there is no necessary correspondence between the word and the meaning, the signifier and the signified. ② The use of signs (words) and their meaning can vary depending on the flow of the text in which they are used, leading to the possibility of ‘deconstructing’ text to reveal its underlying inconsistencies. ③ Reality exists outside of our thoughts, and it is only through language that we are able to perceive the natural world as it really is. ④ This approach can be applied to all forms of representation ― pictures, films, etc. that gain added or alternative meanings by the overlaying of references to previous uses. ⑤ This can be seen particularly in the media, where it is difficult to distinguish the real from the unreal ― everything is representation, there is no reality.






[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) This increasing gravity, combined with the timeless radioactive decay of elements like uranium and thorium, caused the new Earth to heat up. The internal temperature and pressure were high enough for many compounds to break down or melt, releasing their water and gases.
(B) The original materials were cold as outer space and dry as dust; whatever water and gases they contained were locked inside individual fragments as chemical compounds. As the fragments joined, the Earth’s gravity increased, attracting larger and larger objects to impact the Earth.
(C) Even solid material could begin to move and flow under such conditions. Separation by density began, and the Earth started to organize into its present layered structure. The heaviest metals sank to the center; the lightest materials migrated outward.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


	

영어 영역	7
37.	39.




(A) That is because unless we can control the world intellectually by maps we cannot control it militarily or economically. Mercator, Moli?re, Columbus and Captain Cook imperialized in different ways, but they all imperialized, and ultimately the effectiveness of one depended upon and supported the effectiveness of all the others.
(B) Similarly the US form of contemporary colonization, which involves occupying economies and political parties rather than physical territories, is accompanied by the power of both Hollywood and the satellite to represent the world to and for the US.
(C) Shakespeare, Jane Austen and maps were as important to English Imperial power as was the East India Company, the British army and the churches of England. It is no coincidence that modern Europe, the Europe of colonization, was also the Europe of “great art,” and no coincidence either that it was the Europe of great map makers. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Babylonian astronomers created detailed records of celestial movements in the heavens, using the resulting tables to sieve out irregularities and, with them, the favour of the gods. ( ① ) This was the seed of what we now call the scientific method ― a demonstration that accurate observations of the world could be used to forecast its future. ( ② ) The importance of measurement in this sort of cosmic comprehension did not develop smoothly over the centuries. ( ③ ) The suspicion was due to the influence of ancient  Greeks  in the era’s scholasticism, particularly Plato and Aristotle, who stressed that the material world was one of unceasing change and instability. ( ④ ) They emphasized that reality was best understood by reference to immaterial qualities, be they Platonic forms or Aristotelian causes. ( ⑤ ) It would take the revelations of the scientific revolution to fully displace these instincts, with observations of the night sky once again proving decisive. [3점]
* celestial: 천체의 ** sieve: 거르다



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　Language, and the word “animal,” deceives us. The word “animal” categorizes all non-human animals and distances humans from other animals. ( ① ) Seeing all other animals as one group in contrast to humans reinforces anthropocentrism, which contributes to the legitimization of practices in which other animals are used for human benefit. ( ② ) To account for this multitude, using the word “animot” has been proposed. ( ③ ) In speech it refers to the plural, the multiplicity of animals, which is necessary because there is no one “animal.” ( ④ ) The “mot” in “animot” refers to the act of naming and the risks involved in drawing a distinction between human and animal by the human. ( ⑤ ) It reminds us of the fact that it is a word for animals, not a reference to an existing group of animals.





$


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① inclination …… severe	② opposition …… familiar
③ inclination …… vague	④ opposition …… unexpected
⑤ attachment …… subtle


	

8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




(B)



(C)
(D) 





41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장
적절한 것은?








⑤ Human Brains Develop Through Interaction with Other Species

42. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
44. 
밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 교수와 상인은 각자의 정원에 같은 종류의 식물을 심었다.
② 상인은 자신이 교수보다 식물을 더 잘 보살폈다고 생각했다.
③ 교수는 학생들이 식물과 같다고 말했다.
④ 상인은 교육이 무엇인지 다시 생각해 보기 시작했다.
⑤ 상인의 식물은 폭풍으로 인한 손상을 입지 않았다.






2019학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think this is not what I ordered.
② I’m afraid that’s not available today.
③ I prefer to have dinner with friends.
④ Anything that’s not too spicy is okay.
⑤ It depends on what you eat every day.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll keep an eye on the key.
② Don’t worry. We have an extra key.
③ Thank you. We hope to see you again.
④ Sorry. Our hotel will be renovated soon.
⑤ No. We have no record of your reservation.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 자전거 전용 도로 확충을 건의하려고
② 전동 스쿠터용 안전 용품을 소개하려고
③ 교통사고 발생 시 대처 요령을 설명하려고
④ 보행자를 배려하는 교통 정책을 홍보하려고
⑤ 전동 스쿠터 운행 시 유의 사항을 전달하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 조언을 할 때는 공감을 먼저 표현해야 한다.
② 문제 해결책은 스스로 찾게 하는 것이 좋다.
③ 오해를 줄이려면 대화를 자주 나누어야 한다.
④ 성적 향상을 위해 효과적인 학습 전략이 필요하다.
⑤ 가족 간에도 부정적인 감정 표현을 자제해야 한다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 무용 강사 - 수강생
② 촬영 기사 - 소품 담당자
③ 음향 감독 - 무대 디자이너
④ 영상 편집 기사 - 무용 단원
⑤ 연예인 매니저 - 팬클럽 운영자

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 조명 점검하기	② 조리 도구 확인하기
③ 화면 조정하기	④ 요리 재료 준비하기
⑤ 요리사에게 전화하기


8. 대화를 듣고, Tony가 방과 후에 학교에 남으려는 이유를 고르 시오.
① 연극 연습을 해야 해서
② 방과후수업을 수강해야 해서
③ 친구와 로봇을 만들어야 해서
④ 담임 선생님과 면담을 해야 해서
⑤ 가족 행사 시간에 맞추어 가야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $40	② $50	③ $54	④ $64	⑤ $70


10.대화를 듣고, Starlight Read­a­Thon에 관해 언급되지 않은 것  을 고르시오.
① 일시	② 장소	③ 참가 기념품
④ 준비물	⑤ 중도 귀가 가능 여부


1.Cherrywood Garage Sale에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10월 두 번째 토요일에 열린다.
② 18세 이상의 Cherrywood 주민은 판매자로 등록할 수 있다.
③ 판매자의 집 위치를 보여 주는 지도를 제작해 배포한다.
④ 판매 시작 시간과 종료 시간이 지정되어 있다.
⑤ 판매자의 등록비는 마을 IT 센터로 보내진다.




2	영어 영역



12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  주문할  전동  두피 마사지기를 고르시오.
Electric Scalp Massagers

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


①
②
③
④
⑤


13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I knew you’d make it. You studied hard.
② I’d like to join your study group. Can I?
③ Don’t burn up your data watching a video.
④ It’s surprising that it attracts so many people.
⑤ I’ll let you know the name of the video channel.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Okay. I’ll choose one or two from the list and call them.
② First, we should persuade Sarah to change her mind.
③ Absolutely. I agree that Sarah is the best candidate.
④ Let me join you when you visit her at the hospital.
⑤ No way. We can’t cancel or postpone the concert.

15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ron이 Ms. Kim에게 할 말로 가장 적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Ron:  	
① I hope you can participate in the main event.
② We’d rather perform at the closing ceremony.
③ A taekwondo demonstration requires much practice.
④ Please check the changed schedule before we start.
⑤ I’m afraid I cannot take charge of the demonstration.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① using natural materials for outdoor activities
② calculating the environmental impact of trails
③ recycling materials from public sport facilities
④ choosing surface materials for public park trails
⑤ raising awareness of public park safety measures

17.언급된 재료가 아닌 것은?
① sand	② rubber	③ bricks	④ wood	⑤ asphalt






① 회의 일정 변경 사유를 알리려고
② 건의안이 거절된 이유를 설명하려고
③ 제안 사항에 관한 회의 참석을 요청하려고
④ 사내 아이디어 공모전의 심사를 부탁하려고
⑤ 개인 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램 사용법을 안내하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Mary held my hand and made me follow her. With my eyes blindfolded, I was wondering to what fantastic place she was taking me. She stopped me suddenly and played my all­time   favorite  song:  When    the    Stars     Go   Blue.     I  took   a deep, shaky breath. When Mary pulled off my blindfold, my jaw dropped and I gasped at the sight before me. We were on a hill. There were no city lights anywhere in sight. The only things giving off light were the moon and the stars. Mary took my hand in hers again. The next thing I knew was that we were dancing, staring into each other’s eyes. I wished the night would last forever.
① anticipating → delighted	② anxious → frightened
③ disappointed → satisfied	④ ashamed → relaxed
⑤ grateful → annoyed

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The human brain is wired to look for threats ? a trait that kept us alive when we were living on the savannas but that can prevent happiness in our modern lives. This so­called “negativity bias” can keep you focused on what’s going wrong (which explains why complaining is such a popular pastime). To break out of this neural rut, train yourself to acknowledge when things go right. If you keep a calendar  or  a journal, make a point to write down what went well. If you’re more of a verbal processor, start your conversations with friends by sharing a recent win (anything that gives you that yesssss feeling). Where the mind goes, reality follows. The more you appreciate life, the more reasons you have to celebrate it.
* rut: 고정된 틀
① 삶의 긍정적인 면을 인식하도록 자신을 훈련하라.
② 경쟁자의 장점을 칭찬하고 따라 배우려 노력하라.
③ 글쓰기를 통해 부정적인 감정을 배출하라.
④ 실패의 원인을 다양한 각도에서 분석하라.
⑤ 불만을 자기 혁신의 동력으로 삼으라.




영어 영역	3

21.밑줄 친 put the proverbial cart before the horse가 다음 글 에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Most people who try to slow down put the proverbial cart before the horse. They make dramatic, often costly changes in their lifestyle, only to encounter two disappointing results. First, they don’t enjoy the changes they make. People who are temperamentally used to a fast­paced life quickly discover that a slower­paced life in the country all but drives them crazy. Their habitual, hectic thinking won’t allow them to adjust the superficial changes they make. Second, lifestyle changes alone rarely make a real difference. You can rearrange the externals of your life in a radically different way, but you always take your thinking with you. If you are a hurried, rushed person in the city, you’ll also be a hurried, rushed person in the country. To mend the problem, you should slow down your life from the inside out.
* temperamentally: 기질적으로
① reflect on themselves before looking at others
② try to heal their body by controlling their mind
③ expect to gain profits without making any efforts
④ are reluctant to adapt to the fast­paced modern life
⑤ change their life’s externals, not the way of thinking







2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We tend to think of technology as shiny tools and gadgets. Even if we acknowledge that technology can exist in disembodied form, such as software, we tend not to include in this category paintings, literature, music, dance, poetry, and the arts in general. But we should. If a thousand lines of letters in UNIX qualifies as a technology (the computer code for a web page), then a thousand lines of letters in English (Hamlet) must qualify as well. They both can change our behavior, alter the course of events, or enable future inventions. A Shakespeare sonnet and a Schubert symphony, then, are in the same category as Google’s search engine and the smartphone: They are something useful produced by a mind. We can’t separate out the multiple overlapping technologies responsible for a Lord of the Rings movie. The literary rendering of the original novel is as much an invention as the digital rendering of its fantastical creatures. Both are useful works of the human imagination. Both influence audiences powerfully. Both are technological.
* gadget: 장치 ** disembodied: 무형의
① 기술은 예술적 상상력을 구현할 수단을 제공한다.
② 상상력을 발휘하여 물리적인 한계를 극복할 수 있다.
③ 고전은 현대 사회에서 새로운 콘텐츠로 재생산되고 있다.
④ 기술의 발전에 따라 문화 산업의 중요성이 확대되고 있다.
⑤ 예술은 유용한 정신적 산물로 기술과 같은 범주에 속한다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sometimes social learning is direct. I want to know how to solve a problem with my computer, and the help­desk adviser tells me where to find the crucial command in the menu; I want to know how to operate my wireless speaker set, and my daughter shows me the right command. Most of the recent, expanding experimental literature focuses on such cases of pure instruction, or pure demonstration, for example, in testing the reliability of transmission chains under various conditions. Many studies of social learning in children focus on the fidelity with which information flows from one child to another in diffusion chains. But the most consequential cases of social learning in humans have not depended on pure demonstration or instruction. Rather, most social learning is hybrid learning: agents acquire skills through socially guided trial and error and socially guided practice. Children do get advice, instruction, and other informational head starts from others, but they get  this support  while engaged in exploratory learning in their environment.
* fidelity: 정확도
① importance of accurate information delivery in teaching
② advantages of individual learning over cooperative learning
③ social	contexts making spiritual exploration personally meaningful
④ social learning as a combination of direct instruction and guided exploration
⑤ differences	between	random	input	of	information	and systematic teaching

24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I can report a number of occasions when my own dogs reacted in a marked, I would say enthusiastic, manner when I wore jingling jewelry that produced a regular rhythm as I walked, though admittedly they did not tap their feet. Although this is a mere anecdote, it suggests that it is wrong to claim that animals are incapable of responding to pronounced rhythms. The specific response of tapping one’s foot or deliberately marking any external rhythm does seem to be a particularly human skill, but this need not be interpreted as the decisive capacity involved in musical response. My dogs in fact responded to other musical features beside the regular jingling of my jewelry. The sound of a siren would set them to howling, as would the sound of my husband’s saxophone. Perhaps Aristotle observed similar reactions of dogs to musical instruments and rhythms. Apparently Darwin did. He reports observing a dog that was “always whining, when one note on a concertina, which was out of tune, was played.”
① Healing Power of Music in Everyday Life
② Do Animals Have Hints of Musical Senses?
③ Music: A Useful Tool for Training Animals
④ Does Your Dog Really Sympathize with You?
⑤ What Your Dog Communicates with Their Body




4	영어 영역



25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
How Attached Do You Feel to Your Local Community?

27.Ducks  Land  & Sea  Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하지 않는 것은?





　The graph above shows the results of a 2018 survey on the attachment feelings of U.S.  adults  to their local community. ① Identical percentages of adults living in suburban and in rural communities said they felt very attached to their local community. ② More than 40% of adults in each of the three types of community responded they felt somewhat attached to their local community. ③ The percentage of adults who felt very attached to their local community increased as








① 탑승 시간은 90분이다.







* amphibious: 수륙 양용의

their age progressed. ④ In the three groups ages 30 and over, more than 40% responded they felt somewhat attached to their local community, respectively. ⑤ In terms of those who felt very attached, the percentage of adults who had lived in their community for 6 to 10 years was more than twice that of those who had resided for less than 6 years.

26.Kurt G?del에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Kurt G?del, one of the most important logicians of the contemporary period, was born in what is today Brno, the Czech Republic. G?del entered the University of Vienna, where he studied mathematics, physics, and philosophy. On completing his undergraduate degree he started graduate work in mathematics, earning his doctorate at age twenty­four. After the publication of the incompleteness theorem, he became an internationally known intellectual figure. He began giving mathematical lectures around the world starting in 1933. He gave his first lecture in the United States that year, where he first met Albert Einstein. This was the beginning of a close friendship that would last until Einstein’s death in 1955. In 1940, under the threat of being drafted into the German army, G?del left for the United States, where he accepted a position at the Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton. He received the first Albert Einstein Award. In 1974 he was awarded the National Medal of Science.

② 매표소 건너편에 무료로 주차할 수 있다.
③ 선착순으로 자리에 앉는다.
④ 12세 이상은 성인 요금이 적용된다.
⑤ 출발 시각 후 30분 안에 일부 환불이 가능하다.




28.Parents  Education  Workshop에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 일치하는 것은?

* theorem: 정리 ** draft: 징집하다, 선발하다
① 대학에서 수학, 물리학, 철학을 공부했다.
② 24세에 박사 학위를 취득했다.
③ 독일에서 Albert Einstein을 처음 만났다.
④ 독일군 징집을 피해 미국으로 갔다.
⑤ Albert Einstein 상의 최초 수상자였다.


① 참가 대상은 초등학교 졸업을 앞둔 아동의 부모이다.
② 오전 및 오후에 각각 2시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 자신에게 맞는 시간과 장소를 선택할 수 있다.
④ 동반한 자녀를 위한 돌봄 서비스를 운영한다.
⑤ 음식과 음료가 제공된다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　The modern adult human brain weighs only 1/50 of the total body weight but uses up to 1/5 of the total energy needs. The brain’s running costs are about eight to ten times as high, per unit mass, as ① those of the body’s muscles. And around 3/4 of that energy is expended on neurons, the
② specialized brain cells that communicate in vast networks to generate our thoughts and behaviours. An individual neuron
③ sends a signal in the brain uses as much energy as a leg muscle cell running a marathon. Of course, we use more energy overall when we are running, but we are not always on the move, whereas our brains never switch off. Even though the brain is metabolically greedy, it still outclasses any desktop computer both in terms of the calculations it can perform and the efficiency ④ at which it does this. We may have built computers that can beat our top Grand Master chess players, but we are still far away from designing one that is capable of recognizing and picking up one of the chess pieces as ⑤ easily as a typical three­year­old child can.
















30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Discovering how people are affected by jokes is often difficult. People ① mask their reactions because of politeness or peer pressure. Moreover, people are sometimes ② unaware of how they, themselves, are affected. Denial, for example, may conceal from people how deeply wounded they are by certain jokes. Jokes can also be termites or time bombs, lingering unnoticed in a person’s subconscious, gnawing on his or her self­esteem or ③ exploding it at a later time. But even if one could accurately determine how people are affected, this would not be an ④ accurate measure of hatefulness. People are often simply wrong about whether a joke is acceptable or hateful. For example, people notoriously find terribly hateful jokes about themselves or their sex, nationalities, professions, etc. ⑤ problematic until their consciousness becomes raised. And the raising of consciousness is often followed by a period of hypersensitivity where people are hurt or offended even by tasteful, tactful jokes.
* termite: 흰개미 ** gnaw: 갉아먹다

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The developmental control that children with certain serious medical problems can exert over their physical activity is relevant to 	. For example, an infant in a crib and a cognitively intact 14­year­old confined to bed due to illness or injury may both be relatively inactive. The adolescent can, however, be expected to have more
awareness of and control over movements such as rolling over that might dislodge or otherwise impair the functioning of a medical device such as a breathing tube or feeding tube. Likewise, a 5­year­old and a 25­year­old who have had a cardiac pacemaker implanted may each know that they need to protect the device, but developmental differences in the understanding of risk and causation and in the control of impulses increase the probability of risky behavior by the child, for example, jumping off a porch.
* dislodge: 떼어 내다 ** cardiac pacemaker: 심박 조율기
① device safety
② mental health
③ pain reactions
④ athletic training
⑤ medical diagnoses












32. There’s more to striving to be in the majority of one’s group than merely acquiring power. We work to be in the majority of our groups not just because the majority controls material and psychological resources, but also because who we are is largely defined by those who claim us as their own. Drawing distinctions between who’s in and who’s out, between who’s right and who’s wrong, between privileged or disadvantaged ? in short, between us and them? motivates us to 	. We seek to belong to the majority of our group, even if our group is in the minority, not just because the majority holds the power, but because the privilege attached to being in the majority position is commonly viewed by others and by ourselves as
deserved. We had it coming. This perception contributes to our sense of worth, of who we are, and to others’ assessments of our value as well. [3점]
① speak for those who are put to silence
② empower the powerless in political processes
③ be counted among those who do the counting
④ value our inner self more than our appearance
⑤ take the outsiders as fashionable rule breakers




6	영어 영역



3.Eating was the original science, the original study of the environment. Kids, just like primitive life­forms, learn about reality by putting it in their mouths. This mouth knowledge knows no abstracts. The world is either sweet or bitter, smooth or prickly, pleasant or unpleasant. Mouth knowledge comes with gut­level certainty. So to eat is literally to know. But to know what? It is to know self from nonself. Mouth knowledge taught us the boundaries of our bodies. When, as babies, we sucked an object, such as a pacifier,
we felt it only from one side, from the side of the mouth. When we sucked our thumbs, we felt them from the outside, through the mouth, and from the inside, through the feeling of the thumb being sucked on. This mouth knowledge ― unlike later school knowledge ― gave us a glimpse of our paradoxical nature: that somehow we 	. [3점]
* pacifier: (유아용) 고무 젖꼭지
① are ignorant of most things but remain confident
② gain pleasure only when we serve for other people
③ find unpleasant situations pleasant when with children
④ are more attracted to things that go against our intuition
⑤ are both the subject and the object of our own experience











34. Multiple and often conflicting notions of truth coexist in Internet situations, ranging from outright lying through mutually aware pretence to playful trickery. As Patricia Wallace puts it, ‘The fact that it is so easy to lie and get away with it ― as long as we can live with our own deceptions  and  the  harm they may cause  others ― is a
significant feature of the Internet.’ It is of course possible to live out a lie or fantasy logically and consistently, and it is on this principle that the games in virtual worlds operate and the nicknamed people in chatgroups interact. But it is by no means easy to maintain a consistent presence through language in a world where multiple interactions are taking place under pressure, where participants are often changing their names and identities, and where the cooperative principle can be arbitrarily abandoned. Putting this another way, when you see an Internet utterance, you often do not know   how   to   take   it,   because   you   do   not know
 	. [3점]
① how much financial profit you can get from it
② what set of conversational principles it is obeying
③ how virtual reality drives out the sense of reality
④ whether you really made the statement in question
⑤ why the other participants were attacking each other

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Competition is basically concerned with how the availability of resources, such as the food and space utilised by various organisms, is reduced by other organisms. Tourism and recreation can result in the transfer of plants and animals to locations where they do not normally occur.
① In these situations the ‘alien’ species are often at an advantage, because the new environment is usually devoid of any natural controls that the ‘invader’ would have evolved with in its original environment. ② Alien plants compete with indigenous species for space, light, nutrients and water.
③ The introduction of alien plants can result in the disruption and impoverishment of natural plant communities.
④ This positive relationship will enhance a particular plant’s capacity to obtain essential nutrients. ⑤ This has occurred in South Africa, for example, where introduced Australian shrubs have been and are degrading species­rich fynbos plant communities in the Southern Cape region.
* devoid of: ~이 없는 ** shrub: 관목




[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것 을 고르시오.
36.

(A) Another way I can allow myself to hold on to statements that contradict the facts is deliberately to refrain from examining the facts to which the statements refer. This attitude is expressed by the quip “Don’t bother me with the facts; I’ve already made up my mind.”
(B) For example, I could not explicitly say to myself “I tell many deliberate lies to Stephanie” and “I never lie to Stephanie.” What I do, assuming the first statement reflects objective facts, is suppress the second statement.
(C) Mental operations of these kinds are not so much instances of reasoning as evasion of reasoning. Obviously, this can have nothing to do with logic. Those forms of unhealthy reasoning can be known as “rationalization.” Rationalization is reasoning in the service of falsehood.
* quip: 발뺌, 핑계 ** evasion: 회피, 모면
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.


(A) But with those same resources you can build fifty times the length of road in flat lowlands and service several tens of thousands of people. Both tasks are possible, but only one is an efficient and productive use of resources and therefore the more feasible.
(B) Economists call this opportunity costs. For example, you may be able to build a road to the top of the mountain to reach a remote chalet, build it strong enough to withstand spring floods, plow it to keep it open in the winter, and repair it and clear it of avalanche debris in the summer.
(C) The more difficult that geography, the more expensive it is to make it useful, and the more expensive to keep it useful. Economic and social development, then, are about figuring out how to use technology and capital, to find out not only what is possible but also feasible. [3점]
* chalet: 산지 가옥 ** avalanche: 눈사태
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Biology is the smallest level at which we could explain creativity. Biology’s units of analysis are genes, DNA, and specific regions of the human brain. ( ① ) In general, scientists agree that explanations at such lower levels of analysis are more general, more universal, more powerful, and have fewer exceptions than explanations at higher levels of analysis ? like the explanations of psychology or sociology. ( ② ) It always makes scientific sense to start your study by attempting to explain something at the lowest possible level. ( ③ ) And decades of study have found no evidence that creativity is localized to any specific brain region; in fact, all of the evidence suggests that creativity is a whole­brain function, drawing on many diverse areas of the brain in a complex systemic fashion. ( ④ ) And there is no evidence of a link between mental illness and creativity. ( ⑤ ) To explain creativity, we need to look to the higher levels of explanation offered by psychology, sociology, and history.

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　For decades, we have been measuring intelligence at the individual level, just as we have been measuring creativity, engagement, and grit. ( ① ) But it turns out we were failing to measure something with far greater impact. ( ② ) As reported in the journal Science, researchers from MIT, Union College, and Carnegie Mellon have finally found a method for systematically measuring the intelligence of a group as opposed to an individual. ( ③ ) Just as we evaluate how successful an individual student will be at solving a problem, we are now able to predict how successful a group of people will be at solving a problem or problems. ( ④ ) But that’s not what happens. ( ⑤ ) Indeed, their research found that a team on which each person was merely average in their individual abilities but possessed  a  collective  intelligence  would continually exhibit higher success rates than a team of individual geniuses.
* grit: 근성








?


(A)(B)①obstacle······projects②approach······analyzes③ analogy	······	beautifies
④ obstacle	······	complicates
⑤ approach	······	emphasizes




8	영어 영역


[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)










(C)
　Grace felt rather proud of herself for having known more than Billy did. (c) Her pride didn’t last long, however. Her brother, Justin, reported to Mom what had happened. He said, “Grace made Billy feel like a fool today.” Grace tossed her head defiantly. “Well, I did know the words, and Billy didn’t,” she said proudly. “Your brother is right, Grace,” said Mom. “You made Billy feel bad by reading for him. After this, you are not to speak up, even if (d) you do know the answer.” Grace nodded her head. She understood that if she knew something, she was to keep it to herself.
















41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① From Material Wealth to Spiritual Wealth
② Are We Headed for a More Equal Society?
③ Globalization: A Step Toward an Equal Society
④ Artificial Intelligence: Our Servant or Our Master?
⑤ How to Close the Gap Between the Rich and the Poor

42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
(D) 

　Mom approached the subject at suppertime, asking, “Grace, can you read your lessons?” Grace said, “Sure, Mom. I can read the whole book!” Mom was puzzled. “Then why,” she asked, “does the teacher say you don’t recite in school?” Grace was surprised. “Why, Mom,” she answered, “you told me not to!” Mom exclaimed, “Why, Grace, I did no such thing!” “Yes, (e) you did,” Grace said. “You told me not to speak up, even when I knew the answer.” Mom remembered. The matter was soon straightened out, and Grace recited again during class.

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Billy는 겨울의 대부분 동안 아팠다.
② 선생님은 엄마에게 Grace의 학업에 관해 말했다.
③ 엄마는 Grace가 Billy를 기쁘게 했다고 말했다.
④ Grace는 책을 모두 읽을 수 있다고 엄마에게 말했다.
⑤ Grace는 다시 수업 시간에 소리 내어 책을 읽었다.



	


2023학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
제 3 교시	영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 발코니 사용 수칙을 안내하려고
② 화재 시 대피 방법을 설명하려고
③ 발코니 보수공사 동의를 요청하려고
④ 아파트 안전 점검 계획을 공지하려고
⑤ 아파트 주민 친목 행사를 홍보하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 언어 교육은 일찍 시작할수록 효과적이다.
② 외국어 학습 시 구체적인 목표를 설정해야 한다.
③ 외국어 교육을 위한 다양한 학습 방법 개발이 필요하다.
④ 외국어 말하기 연습 시 실수를 두려워하지 않아야 한다.
⑤ 언어를 통해 그 언어 사용자들의 문화를 이해할 수 있다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 방송 작가 - 애견 훈련사	② 고객 - 애견 미용사
③ 달력 디자이너 - 인쇄소 직원	④ 자원봉사자 - 수의사
⑤ 사진작가 - 유기견보호소 직원

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.












5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공항에 마중 나가기	② 안내 학생 선정하기
③ 안내 학생 이름표 만들기	④ 학교 방문단 사진 찍기
⑤ 학교 방문단 점심 준비하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $68	② $75	③ $81	④ $86	⑤ $95


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 스쿨버스를 놓친 이유를 고르시오.
① 늦잠을 자서
② 병원에 다녀와서
③ 아침 운동을 오래 해서
④ 수업 발표 자료를 두고 와서
⑤ 아파트 엘리베이터가 고장 나서

8. 대화를 듣고, Translators For All에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 지원 자격	② 근무 장소	③ 급여
④ 채용 인원	⑤ 지원 방법

9. Firefly Walk에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 곤충 전문가가 안내한다.
② 일일 최대 참여 인원은 12명이다.
③ 사전에 예약을 해야 한다.
④ 기부금만으로 운영된다.
⑤ 비가 오면 다른 행사로 대체된다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 베개를 고르시오.
Pillows

①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① That painting won’t be displayed in this exhibition.
② I’ll pack all my paintings for delivery to the gallery.
③ I should start learning to paint like you.
④ I’ve already met some of the other painters.
⑤ It was sold on the first day of the gallery exhibition.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Of course. When are you available?
② No worries. Your package is the cheapest one.
③ Sure. The package is refundable if you don’t open it.
④ Absolutely. I’m happy to contact you before you leave.
⑤ Be careful. You should get enough information on the trip.




2	영어 영역


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Great. A powerful stroke is my strongest point in tennis.
② I see. Is there any lighter racket I can borrow from you?
③ I agree. Try to practice your stroke more with this racket.
④ That’s true. I’ll be a respectful tennis player from now on.
⑤ Okay. I should drop by a shop to see which racket suits me.




14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:  	
① That’s why I changed all of my glass cups to plastic.
② I’ll try to look for a delivery restaurant to save time.
③ There’s a reason that restaurant is popular with people.
④ You really made me think again about using food delivery.
⑤ I hope people know how important it is to eat fresh food.




15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Nicky가 Chris에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Nicky:  	
① You need to stick to your musical identity.
② Can you invite me to your band’s performance?
③ Think about becoming a professional musician later.
④ Why don’t we accept the proposal to try something new?
⑤ Let’s keep practicing so we win instead of that other team.


[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① animal­related terms in the financial sector
② what animals symbolize by country
③ aggressive tendencies of animals
④ how humans have domesticated animals
⑤ risks and benefits of livestock industry investment




17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① bulls	② sheep	③ cats
④ pigs	⑤ chicken



18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 신설 부서의 업무를 소개하려고
② 기한 내 업무 완료를 당부하려고
③ 부서의 추가 인력 고용을 요청하려고
④ 직원들의 업무 성과를 보고하려고
⑤ 근무 시설 개선 방안을 제안하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Susan의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Susan’s daughter Carrie is a special needs kid. She goes to a special school, special camp, special therapists. One day, out of the blue, she asked Susan if she could go get a slice of pizza on her own, not far from their apartment. Anxious, Susan said, “Well... why not get the pizza and bring it home to eat?” “No!” said Carrie, sixteen at the time. “Other people eat at the pizza place, and I want to, too!” Susan was concerned, but said okay, and Carrie went off by herself a block or two away. After a while, Carrie came back, grinning. “You made it! What made you want to do this?” Susan asked. Carrie had seen her friend Izzy on TV talking about his subway ride. “I thought if he could do it, I could do it too.” Susan’s heart swelled, realizing her daughter was braver and much more grown­up than she thought.
① indifferent → thrilled	② worried → proud
③ hopeful	→ regretful	④ ashamed → satisfied
⑤ surprised	→ disappointed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Leaving behind technology during intentional time alone is essential for the cognitive benefits, neurological repair, and spiritual clarity that are the gifts of solitude. Multiple studies show that anxiety is markedly reduced, and we gain benefits similar to solitude, not by simply turning our phones off but by having  them  not physically  with  us.   If  a  phone  is  essential  for safety during time alone, then turn off alerts, cover the screen ? just tape paper right over it ? and keep it somewhere that is terribly inconvenient to access. I am always surprised by how long it takes me to give up the impulse to reach for my phone, often for no reason at all, other than to “just check.” Check what? Always it is something that can do without me for the moment. It is important that we allow ourselves time to free our minds from even the possibility of constant connectivity, to “normalize deactivation,” as herbalist Sophia Rose puts it, allowing our overstimulated neuronal connections to rest and reassemble.

① 개인정보 유출을 막기 위해 휴대전화 보안을 강화해야 한다.
② 물리적 고립 상황에 대응하기 위한 통신 기술을 개발해야 한다.
③ 업무에 집중하기 위해 근무 시간에 휴대전화 사용을 자제해야 한다.
④ 혼자 있는 시간의 이점을 얻으려면 휴대전화와 떨어져 있어야 한다.
⑤ 고독감을 느끼지 않기 위해 사람들과 정서적인 연결을 지속해야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 production and marketing이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Humans already have a longer period of protected immaturity ? a longer childhood ? than any other species. Across species, a long childhood is correlated with an evolutionary strategy that depends on flexibility, intelligence, and learning. There is a developmental division of labor. Children get to learn freely about their particular environment without worrying about their own survival ? caregivers look after that. Adults use what they learned as children to mate, hunt, and generally succeed as grown­ups in that environment. Children are the R&D (research and development) department of the human species. We grown­ups are production and marketing. We start out as brilliantly flexible but helpless and dependent babies, great at learning everything but terrible at doing just about anything. We end up as much less flexible but much more efficient and effective adults, not so good at learning but terrific at planning and acting.
① agents who conduct the tasks of living with what they learned
② executives who assign roles according to one’s characteristics
③ actors who realize their dreams by building better relations
④ traders who contribute to economic development
⑤ leaders who express their thoughts to others







22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In order to be successful and equitable, ecosystem management must be linked to poverty reduction. Urban infrastructure projects need to address the trade­offs between conservation, livelihoods, and equitable distribution of resources. Historically there has been tension when conservation models that create protected areas are perceived as inaccessible to communities. Often, these models are implemented at the expense of poor and marginalized residents and users of resources from the areas. Social, economic, and environmental development programs have become obstacles to sustainable development because there is no balance between the need to protect ecosystem services and the desire to use resources to address community needs. Communities need to be allowed to identify and negotiate their own options and to increase their flexibility to cope with unexpected change.
* equitable: 공평한
① 무분별한 도시 개발은 사회적 양극화를 심화한다.
② 도시 기반 시설 확충 시 안정적인 재정 지원이 중요하다.
③ 인근 지역 간의 긴밀한 협력은 생태계 보존의 기반이 된다.
④ 자원의 순환과 공정한 배분은 지속가능한 발전의 필수조건이다.
⑤ 생태계 관리 시 빈곤층을 포함한 지역사회의 요구를 고려할 필요가 있다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　For those of any age with an existing network of friendships built up in the three­dimensional world, social networking sites can be a happy extension of communication, along with email, video calls, or phone calls, when face­to­face time together just isn’t possible. The danger comes when a fake identity is both tempting and possible through relationships that are not based on real, three­dimensional interaction, and/or when the most important things in your life are the secondhand lives of others rather than personal experiences. Living in the context of the screen might suggest false norms of desirable lifestyles full of friends and parties. As ordinary human beings follow the activities of these golden individuals, self­esteem will inevitably drop; yet the constant narcissistic obsession with the self and its inadequacies will dominate. We can imagine a vicious circle where the more your identity is harmed as a result of social networking and the more inadequate you feel, the greater the appeal of a medium where you don’t need to communicate with people face­to­face.
* narcissistic: 자아도취적인
① negative effects of social networking services on self­perception
② unknown risks to personal well­being from internet addiction
③ software features to make virtual lives more realistic
④ efforts to increase face­to­face interaction for social bonds
⑤ difficulties of filtering out fake information on social media



24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Melody is one of the primary ways that our expectations are controlled by composers. Music theorists have identified a principle called gap fill; in a sequence of tones, if a melody makes a large leap, either up or down, the next note should change direction. A typical melody includes a lot of stepwise motion, that is, adjacent tones in the scale. If the melody makes a big leap, theorists describe a tendency for the melody to “want” to return to the jumping­off point; this is another way to say that our brains expect that the leap was only temporary, and tones that follow need to bring us closer and closer to our starting point, or harmonic “home.” In “Over the Rainbow,” the melody begins with one of the largest leaps we’ve ever experienced in a lifetime of music listening: an octave. This is a strong schematic violation, and so the composer rewards and soothes us by bringing the melody back toward home again, but not by too much because he wants to continue to build tension. The third note of this melody fills the gap.
* adjacent: 인접한

① How Awesome Repetition in Melody Can Be!
② Why a Big Leap Melody Tends to Go Back Home
③ Lyrics of Songs: Key Controller of Our Emotions
④ Should Composers Consider Their Potential Audience?
⑤ Misunderstanding of Composers’ Intention with Melody




4	영어 영역


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The graph above shows the share of the global air passenger traffic by region in 2015 and its projected share in 2040. ① Asia Pacific had the highest share of 34 percent among the six regions in 2015 and is expected to have the highest share in 2040. ② Europe is projected to rank second in 2040, with its share less than half of that of Asia Pacific that year. ③ The shares of Europe and North America are both expected to decrease from 2015 to 2040, the decrease of the latter being greater than that of the former. ④ The share of Middle East and North Africa in 2040 is projected to be more than double that of 2015, while in Latin America and Caribbean, the share will decline slightly from 2015 to 2040. ⑤ Sub­Saharan Africa, which had the lowest share in 2015 among the regions, with 2 percent, will be the only region to keep the same share in 2040.



26. Anna May Wong에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Anna May Wong is considered the first Chinese­American movie star in Hollywood. She dropped out of high school to pursue a full­time acting career and, at 17, she played her first leading role in The Toll of the Sea. Reviewers praised her  extraordinary acting but her ethnicity prevented U.S. filmmakers from casting her as a leading lady. Frustrated, Wong left for Europe in 1928, where she had main roles in many notable films. When American studios wanted fresh European	talent	in	the	1930s,	Wong’s	new	prestige immediately led to a main role on Broadway. She returned to America and used her influence to advocate for better film opportunities for Chinese­Americans. In 1938, she sold her movie costumes and donated the money from the sale to organizations supporting Chinese refugees. During World War II, she gave political speeches against the anti­Asian attitudes in the U.S. In 2022, she became the first Asian American to appear on U.S. currency ― a century after she
landed her first leading role.
① 전업 배우가 되기 위해 고등학교를 중퇴했다.
② 유럽에서는 영화에 출연하지 못했다.
③ 자신의 영화 의상 판매 수입금을 기부했다.
④ 반아시아적 태도에 대항하는 연설을 했다.
⑤ 미국 화폐에 등장한 최초의 아시아계 미국인이 되었다.
27. 
Little Adventure Pack에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 5세에서 7세까지의 아동에게 추천된다.
② 비회원에게는 10달러에 판매된다.
③ 소형 망원경을 포함한다.
④ 온라인으로 주문되어야 한다.
⑤ 총 판매 수량에 제한이 없다.




28. 2023 Oakfield Mini Marathon에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① Central Park 주차장에서 출발한다.
② 13세 이상 참여할 수 있다.
③ 참가비는 무료이다.
④ 9월 1일까지 등록해야 한다.
⑤ 등록을 하면 티셔츠를 받는다.




영어 영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　The intelligence of monkeys pales in comparison with that of our closest relatives, the great apes: orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees, and bonobos, whose brains are twice as ① large relative to their body weight. Most primatologists believe the apes acquired their larger brains to help them communicate with and ② manipulate their peers. And they certainly do exhibit complex social interactions within their group; they seem capable of feeling empathy, have a self­image, and exhibit a degree of consciousness as they can recognize ③ themselves in a mirror. But this “social hypothesis” does not explain why it was the great apes that became so clever, rather than monkeys or a group of terrestrial mammals. Nor does it explain why orangutans, who seldom encounter their neighbors, ④ being so intelligent. It seems likely that some other factor must have been in play ⑤ that caused apes to become more intelligent in the first place, and which could subsequently have enabled some members of the group to develop high­level sociality.
* primatologist: 영장류 동물학자 ** terrestrial: 육상의















30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

　The consequences of the mechanical breakdown of food by cooking are profound. Both the stiffness and toughness of the food is drastically reduced, making mechanical processing far
① easier. The forces your teeth need to apply to break up the food are lower, and the food ② releases its cell contents far more easily. The optimal tooth shape for breaking up the food also ③ changes. Rather than needing thick, flat plates that can apply large compression forces to grind up tough materials and crush hard ones, it is better to have molars with pointed ends to cut through the softer food. It loosens at much ④ higher forces and breaks up far more quickly. Modern hunter­gatherers spend far less time chewing their food even than apes that eat relatively soft fruit; they chew for less than an hour a day compared with five or six hours for chimpanzees. This ⑤ frees up plenty of time for other tasks, such as looking after the fire, making a permanent camp, toolmaking, or further foraging.
* molar: 어금니 ** forage: 식량을 찾아다니다

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Learning   is   constructive,                                                         not   destructive.                                                          This   means   we don’t 	mental models ― we simply expand upon them. To understand what I mean, think back to your
childhood. There was likely a time when you believed in Santa Claus; your mental model accepted him and your predictions accounted for his existence. At some point, however, you came to recognize he was fictitious and you updated your mental model accordingly. At that moment, you didn’t suddenly forget everything about Santa Claus. To this day, you can still recognize him, speak of him and embrace young children’s belief in him. In other words, you didn’t destroy your old mental model, you simply added new information to it. By building upon old mental models we are able to maintain ties to the past, foster a deeper understanding of concepts and develop an ever­expanding pool of information to draw upon in order to continually adapt to an ever­evolving world.
* fictitious: 가상의

① replace	② imagine	③ predict
④ analyze	⑤ imitate








32. A commonality between conceptual and computer art was
 	. Conceptual artists decoupled the relationship between the art object and artist by mitigating all personal signs of invention. The artist became detached from the idea of personalized draftsmanship by installing a predetermined system ― a type of instruction for another to follow. That way there was, as Sol LeWitt states, no “dependence on the skill of the artist as a craftsman.” Effectively any person could carry out the instructions. The same process was at work in computer art, where artists devised a predetermined drawing algorithm for the computer automaton to carry out the instruction. The human agent initiated the conceptual form, and a machine actuated it. Likewise, the computer artwork lacked any autographic mark, trace of spontaneity, or artistic authenticity. The plotter arm would replace the human arm in the production process. [3점]
* mitigate: 완화하다 ** actuate: 작동시키다
*** plotter: 플로터(데이터를 도면화하는 출력 장치)
① the suppression of authorial presence
② the rejection of meaningless repetition
③ the elevation of ordinary objects to art
④ the preference of simplicity to elaboration
⑤ the tendency of artists to work in collaboration




6	영어 영역


33. Innate behaviors used for finding food, such as grazing, scavenging, or hunting, are more dependent on learning than behaviors used to consume food. Mating, nesting, eating, and
prey­killing behaviors tend to be governed more by instinct. The greater dependence on learning to find food makes animals in the wild 	. Behaviors used to kill or consume food can be the same in any environment. Ernst Mayr, an evolutionary biologist, called these different behavioral systems “open” or “closed” to the effects of experience. A lion hunting her prey is an example of an open system. The hunting female lion recognizes her prey from a distance and approaches it carefully. Charles Herrick, a neurobiologist, wrote, “the details of the hunt vary every time she hunts. Therefore no combination of simple reflex arcs laid down in the nervous system will be adequate to meet the infinite variations of the requirements  for obtaining food.” [3점]
* scavenge: 동물의 사체를 찾아 다니다
** reflex arc: 반사궁(충격이 통과하여 반사를 형성하는 신경 경로)
① less cooperative with others in their community
② less focused on monitoring predators’ approaches
③ more intelligent to build their natural surroundings
④ more sensitive to visual information than any other stimuli
⑤ more flexible and able to adapt to a variety of environments


34. The revolution’s victorious party can claim to have resolved the fundamental anomalies of the old paradigm and to have renewed the prospects for successful research governed by
shared assumptions. Indeed, the new community typically rewrites the textbooks, and retells its own history, to reflect this point of view. But from the standpoint of the losers, or even of those who look on impartially, such rewritings might seem to mark change without any genuine claim to progress, because there is no neutral standard by which to assess the merits of the change. The resulting body of knowledge is in any case not cumulative, since much of what was previously known (or merely believed) had to be excluded without ever having been conclusively refuted. One likewise cannot plausibly talk about revolutionary reconstitutions of science as  aiming  toward  truth,  for  similarly,  there  can  be  no
 	. The available justification of scientific knowledge after revolutions, couched in new terms according to newly instituted standards, may well be sufficient, but perhaps only because these standards and terms are now inevitably our own. [3점]
* anomaly: 변칙, 이례 ** refute: 반박하다
*** plausibly: 그럴듯하게
① official connection between scientists and policy makers
② impartial formulation of standards for its assessment
③ incomplete terms to describe the reconstitutions
④ easy process to learn about new scientific theories
⑤ strong belief that scientific progress benefits everyone
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　The written word is the obvious, and easiest, place to start when exploring local history, if only to see what has already been written on the subject. Local history books have been written for centuries and are very variable in quality. ① These books will certainly not mention your ancestor by name unless they played a particularly prominent part in the development of the locality in question. ② However, they do provide information about how a place changed over time, who the major personalities were and the significant events that occurred there; or at least those selected by the author for inclusion. ③ If the author is writing from his personal experiences, he must be allowed to spend more energy on adding creative twists to a story that already exists. ④ Unless a book is extremely large or the district chosen is very small, then the author must choose very carefully what he is to include and their priorities may not be the same as all their readers. ⑤ It is well worth reading some or preferably all of the books written about a locality that your ancestors lived in.



[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 





(A) For example, there are a variety of t­shirt and tea towel designs which celebrate the dangerous animals that can be encountered in Australia. This is a whimsical reconfiguration of the perceived threat that these animals pose to some tourists considering travel to this country.
(B) The harmful effects of animals on tourism experiences has been the subject of analysis in a small number of studies, but deaths or injuries caused by animals to tourists are tiny in comparison to other causes such as drowning and vehicular accidents.
(C) Nevertheless, the possibility that they might encounter a dangerous animal such as shark or snake or catch a disease such as malaria is sufficient to stop at least some tourists from visiting destinations where such threats exist. Sometimes this fear is turned into a marketing opportunity.
* whimsical: 기발한 ** reconfiguration: 재구성
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) Yet, they all arrive at pretty much the same grammar. The input that children get is haphazard in the sense that caretakers do not talk to their children to illustrate a particular point of grammar. Yet, all children develop systematic knowledge of a language.
(B) Thus, despite the severe limitations and variation in the input children receive, and also in their personal circumstances, they all develop a rich and uniform system of linguistic knowledge. The knowledge attained goes beyond the input in various ways.
(C) This has been referred to as the creative aspect of language use. This ‘creativity’ does not refer to the ability to write poetry or novels but rather the ability to produce and understand an unlimited set of new sentences never spoken or heard previously. The precise linguistic input children receive differs from child to child; no two children are exposed to exactly the same set of utterances. [3점]
* haphazard: 무작위적인, 되는 대로의

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

　Often time, or lack of time, plays an important role in the purchase of everyday products. Milica Milosavljevic and his coworkers conducted an experiment looking at the relationship between visual salience and the decision to purchase. ( ① ) They showed subjects 15 different food items on fMRI, such as those we find in a candy vending machine at the train station, that is, bars, chips, fruity items, etc. ( ② ) These were rated by the subjects on a scale of 1?15 according to “favorite snack” to “don’t like at all.” ( ③ ) They were then presented in varying brightness and time, with subjects always having to make a choice between two products. ( ④ ) If we are also distracted because we are talking to someone, on the phone, or our thoughts are elsewhere at the moment, our actual preference for a product falls further into the background and visual conspicuousness comes to the fore. ( ⑤ ) Colors play an important role in this.
* salience: 두드러짐 ** fMRI: 기능적 자기 공명 영상
*** conspicuousness: 눈에 잘 띔



　If we look at contemporary British ‘culture’ we will probably quickly conclude that sport is an important part of the culture. In other words, it is something that many people in the society share and value. ( ① ) In addition, we would also probably conclude that the most ‘important’ sport within British culture is football. ( ② ) We would ‘know’ this from the evidence that on a daily basis there is a significant amount of ‘cultural’ activity all focused on football in terms of the amount of people who play it, watch it, read about it and talk about it. ( ③ ) It could be argued from looking at their ‘cultural’ activities and habits, that people from a middle­class background seem to prefer rugby over football, or that more women play netball than football. ( ④ ) Equally, if you went to the USA and were talking about ‘football’, most people would assume you were talking about American football rather than soccer. ( ⑤ ) From this we can conclude that different cultures produce different ways of understanding, or evaluating, human activities such as sport.



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　As a social species, should we not all be synchronized and therefore awake at the same time to promote maximal human interactions? Perhaps not. Humans likely evolved to co­sleep as families or even whole tribes, not alone or as couples. Appreciating this evolutionary context, the benefits of such genetically programmed variation in sleep/wake timing preferences can be understood. The night people in the group would not be going to sleep until one or two a.m., and not waking until nine or ten a.m. The morning people, on the other hand, would have retired for the night at nine p.m. and woken at five a.m. Consequently, the group as a whole is only collectively vulnerable (i.e., every person asleep) for just four rather than eight hours, despite everyone still getting the chance for eight hours of sle p. That’s potentially a 50 percent
increase in survival fitness. Mother Nature would never pass on
a	biological	trait ? here,	the	useful	variability	in	when individuals within a collective tribe go to sleep and wake up ? that could enhance the survival safety and thus fitness of a species by this amount. And so she hasn’t.
* synchronize: 동시성을 갖게 하다 ** vulnerable: 취약한
?
Individuals  have   (A)    in the time of the day when   they prefer to sleep and wake up, which could promote their (B) as a group.

(A) (B)
① differences	……	originality
② differences	……	survivability
③ similarities	……	cooperation
④ similarities	……	adaptation
⑤ regularities	……	mobility




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.


(B) 
　The roar of the crowd became quiet as hundreds of frowning faces pointed in (b) his direction. Irritated and embarrassed, they began to shout: “Get that boy away from there!” “Who’d bring a kid that young in here?” “Where’s his mother?” “Stop (c) him!” Backstage, Paderewski overheard the sounds out front and quickly put together in his mind what was happening. Hurriedly, he grabbed his coat and rushed toward the stage.

(C) 
　As she turned to talk with friends, her son could stay seated no longer. (d) He slipped away from her side, strangely drawn to the black concert grand piano and its leather stool on the huge stage flooded with blinding lights. Without much notice from the sophisticated audience, the boy sat down at the piano stool, staring wide­eyed at the black and white keys. He placed his small, shaky fingers in the right location and  began to play “Chopsticks.”












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Face Recognition Technologies: Blessing or Not?
② The Faster You Memorize, the Faster You Forget
③ Generalization Can Be Both a Shortcut and a Trap!
④ The Flaw in Cognition Caused by Flawless Memory
⑤ Why It Gets Difficult to Remember Details As You Age

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Ignace Jan Paderewski, the famous composer­pianist, was scheduled to perform at a great concert hall in America. It was an evening to remember ― black tuxedos and long evening dresses, a high­society event. Present in the audience that evening was a mother with her nine­year­old son. Tired of waiting, (a) he squirmed constantly in his seat. His mother was in hopes that her son would be encouraged to practice the piano if he could just hear the great Paderewski at the keyboard. So, against his wishes, he had come.
(A) 

　Without one word of announcement Paderewski bent over behind the boy, reached around both sides, began to improvise a countermelody to harmonize with and enhance “Chopsticks.” As the two of them played together, (e) he kept whispering in the boy’s ear: “Keep going. Don’t quit. Keep on playing... don’t stop... don’t quit.” Together, the old master and the little boy transformed an embarrassing situation into a wonderfully creative experience. The audience was mesmerized.
* improvise: 즉흥 연주하다 ** mesmerize: 매혹하다


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)


44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 소년은 연주회에 오고 싶지 않았으나 오게 되었다.
② 짜증이 나고 당황한 관중은 크게 소리치기 시작했다.
③ Paderewski는 서둘러 무대로 달려갔다.
④ 소년은 무대 위 피아노 의자에 앉아 건반을 응시했다.
⑤ Paderewski는 짧은 공지 후 소년과 함께 연주했다.

* squirm: 꼼지락대다



제 3 교시

2022학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역






1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 환경보호 표어 대회 참여를 독려하려고
② 학교 생태정원 이름짓기 공모를 안내하려고
③ 학교 시설 보수공사 기간 연장을 공지하려고
④ 학생회장 선출을 위한 온라인 투표 방법을 알리려고
⑤ 생태정원 가꾸기 활동을 위한 자원봉사자를 모집하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 간 동료 피드백은 온라인 수업에 효과적이다.
② 수업 전 학생들과의 대화로 친밀감을 형성할 수 있다.
③ 온라인 자료를 수업에 활용할 때 저작권에 유의해야 한다.
④ 긍정적인 격려로 학생들에게 자신감을 심어 주는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 학생의 다양한 수준을 고려하여 온라인 수업을 계획해야 한다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사진작가 - 학생	② 화가 - 잡지사 기자
③ 미술 교사 - 학부모	④ 전시회 기획자 - 의뢰인
⑤ 큐레이터 - 인쇄물 제작업자


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 벼룩시장 운영을 연기한 이유를 고르시오.
① 공원 긴급 보수 작업이 계획되어서
② 행사  당일  폭우가 예상되어서
③ 행사  물품  배송이 지연되어서
④ 다른 행사와 시간이 겹쳐서
⑤ 참가 인원이 적어서

8. 대화를 듣고, Young Edison Science Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 주제	③ 참여 가능 인원
④ 운영 시간	⑤ 준비물

9. Flash Fiction Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 출품작의 단어 수에 제한이 있다.
② 참가자는 다수의 작품을 제출할 수 있다.
③ 제출 마감일은 7월 15일이다.
④ 심사는 학년별로 이루어진다.
⑤ 입상작은 학교 신문에 게재된다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 아웃도어용 시계를 고르시오.


4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서  대화의 내용과 일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.	①
②
③
④
⑤

Outdoor Watches


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Let’s ask where Monica’s classroom is.
② I’ll take her a bit earlier than usual then.
③ Okay. I’ll ask her teacher when they close.
④ No problem. My meeting ended successfully.
⑤ Thank you. I’ll take care of the client instead.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 영화 고르기	② 스피커 설치하기
③ 간식 만들기	④ 담요 가지고 오기
⑤ 쿠션 빌려오기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $225	② $250	③ $255	④ $280	⑤ $315
12. 
대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I can’t remember my script at all.
② With your help, the repairman fixed the copier.
③ Let’s try a different copier on the second floor.
④ I was impressed by your presentation last time.
⑤ Don’t panic. You can finish your script next week.




2	영어 영역


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① It’s better to get dance training this time.
② Why don’t you try auditioning to join our team?
③ Okay. I’ll be sure to make the post by tomorrow.
④ Good job! The audition was tough, but we made it!
⑤ Offline performances are more fun than online ones.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Of course. I’ll practice making Japanese dishes with you.
② Right. You’ll build confidence through continual practice.
③ Great! I’m so proud of you for passing the test.
④ Well, you need to be careful while cooking.
⑤ I agree. Empathy is the key to success.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Clara가 Jacob에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Clara:  	
① You’ll have more followers soon, so don’t worry.
② Be more responsible when posting to social media.
③ It’s essential to actively interact with your followers.
④ How about putting away your smartphone at bedtime?
⑤ You should disable social media notifications during dinner.


[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① sounds and roles of string instruments in an orchestra
② ways to tune different types of string instruments
③ importance of playing in harmony in an orchestra
④ stage positions of various orchestral instruments
⑤ origins of the names of musical instruments


17. 언급된 악기가 아닌 것은?

① violin② viola③ doublebass④ cello⑤ harp

18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 교통 신호등 추가 설치를 제안하려고
② 도로 교통 안전 법규 개정을 촉구하려고
③ 학교 앞 교통 지도 인원의 증원을 건의하려고
④ 학생 안전을 위해 등하굣길 폭의 확장을 요청하려고
⑤ 학교 주변 불법 주정차 차량 단속 강화를 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 나타난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 One night a buddy and I decided we were going to go find that Big Foot. We were in my old truck and we set off across the fields heading toward the tallest hill. The fields were rough, with only the slightest trail to follow. Along the way there were small trenches dug in the fields. I never figured out why. As we got closer and closer to the top of the hill, I was actually becoming scared, which was kind of rare, because at that age I was pretty fearless. As we got to the top of the hill, there was a loud thump! My truck sunk down like something heavy had just jumped in the bed. We were too terrified to look in the back. I panicked and decided to throw the truck into reverse and back down the hill. As I did so, there was another thump and a loud roar now came out like I’d never, ever heard before.
① relieved and relaxed	② pleased and delighted
③ bored and indifferent	④ alarmed and frightened
⑤ dissatisfied and angry
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Placing value on and investing in experiences provides us with a greater sense of vitality. Our experiences make us feel alive and give us greater opportunities to grow. Any time you consider purchasing a new possession, stop yourself and think about what kind of experience it will give you. Ask yourself: How much joy will this bring me? Will the joy be temporary or long­lasting? Will the purchase be something I can share with others? If it becomes clear the purchase will provide only short­term benefit to you, think about an experience you could purchase instead that would provide you with longer­term benefits. For instance, if you have your eye on a new pair of shoes for $150, ask yourself what kind of experience you could enjoy for that same amount. Maybe you’d enjoy a concert with friends or a dinner cruise during the summer. Once you think of an experience you’d enjoy, seriously consider diverting the money for the purchase from possession to experience.
① 소유보다 경험에 가치를 두고 소비해야 한다.
② 물품 구매 시 품질을 우선으로 고려해야 한다.
③ 경제 흐름을 분석한 후 투자 대상을 선정해야 한다.
④ 단기 목표를 설정하여 잦은 성취 경험을 가져야 한다.
⑤ 경험하지 않은 것에 대해 섣불리 옳고 그름을 판단해서는 안 된다.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 this civilization of leisure was, in reality, a Trojan horse가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　It seemed like a fair deal: we would accept new technologies, which would modify our habits and oblige us to adjust to certain changes, but in exchange we would be granted relief from the burden of work, more security, and above all, the freedom to pursue our desires. The sacrifice was worth the gain; there would be no regrets. Yet it has become apparent that this civilization of leisure was, in reality, a Trojan horse. Its  swelling flanks hid  the impositions of a new type of enslavement. The automatons are not as autonomous as advertised. They need us. Those computers that were supposed to do our calculations for us instead demand our attention: for ten hours a day, we are glued to their screens. Our communications monopolize our time. Time itself is accelerating. The complexity of the system overwhelms us. And leisure is often a costly distraction.
* flank: 측면, 옆구리 ** automaton: 자동 장치
① Doing leisure activities increased com unication betwe n colleagues.
② Labor was easily incorporated with leisure by the media.
③ People’s privacy was attacked because of low security.
④ Technology’s promise for leisure actually made people less fre .
⑤ Technological in ovations did not improve hierarchical working culture.


22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Giving honest information may be particularly relevant to integrity because honesty is so fundamental in discussions of trustworthiness. Unfortunately, leaders are often reluctant to tell the truth. During times of crisis and change, business leaders are often faced with the challenge of either telling an uncomfortable truth, remaining silent, or downplaying the severity of the situation. There are plenty of  other situations in which, in the short term, it may be more comfortable not to tell the truth to followers. Ultimately, however, even dishonesty that was meant to protect employee morale will eventually be exposed, undermining trustworthiness at  a time when commitment to the organization is most vital. Even concerted efforts at secrecy can backfire, as employees may simply “fill in the gaps” in their understanding with their own theories about the leader’s behavior. Therefore, leaders need to take steps to explain the true reasons for their decisions to those individuals affected by it, leaving less room for negative interpretations of leader behavior.
① 조직이 처할 위기를 예측하여 사전 대책 수립이 필요하다.
② 리더는 업무 효율 향상을 위해 구성원의 사기를 높여야 한다.
③ 조직에 대한 과도한 헌신을 강조하는 것은 역효과를 초래한다.
④ 리더는 구성원의 비판적 의견을 수용하는 자세를 가져야 한다.
⑤ 리더는 조직 내 신뢰 유지를 위해 구성원에게 진실을 알려야 한다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　From your brain’s perspective, your body is just another source of sensory input. Sensations from your heart and lungs, your metabolism, your changing temperature, and so on, are like ambiguous blobs. These purely physical sensations inside your body have no objective psychological meaning. Once your concepts enter the picture, however, those sensations may take on additional meaning. If you feel an ache in your stomach while sitting at the dinner table, you might experience it as hunger. If flu season is just around the corner, you might experience that same ache as nausea. If you are a judge in a courtroom, you might experience the ache as a gut feeling that the defendant cannot be trusted. In a given moment, in a given context, your brain uses concepts to give meaning to internal sensations as well as to external sensations from the world, all simultaneously. From an aching stomach, your brain constructs an instance of hunger, nausea, or mistrust.
* blob: 형태가 뚜렷하지 않은 것
① influence of mental health on physical performance
② physiological responses to extreme emotional stimuli
③ role of negative emotions in dealing with difficult situations
④ necessity of staying objective in various professional contexts
⑤ brain’s interpretation of bodily sensations using concepts in context







24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　On an antelope’s skull, the eye sockets are situated on the side of the head. This is because this animal spends a lot of its time with its head bent down to eat a low?nutrient food: grass. While the animal is busy grazing, there will be predators out stalking for their food, so the antelope needs the greatest possible range of vision so that it has the maximum chance of seeing its predator and making an escape. With the eye sockets at the back of the head and on the side, it can see nearly 360° around itself. The eye of the antelope is also at the back of its head, giving it a long nose. If the eyes were at the front of the skull, vision would be obscured by long grass, so its long nose also gives an evolutionary advantage.
① Better Predator Detection: Eyes’ Location Matters!
② Escaping as a Primary Defense Tactic in a Field
③ Closer Eyes, Less Accurate Distance Perception
④ A Win?Win Survival Strategy for Prey and Predator
⑤ Why Do Animals Have Longer Noses than Humans?




4	영어 영역


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Black Box Short Play Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?










Friday,
August 12Saturday,
August 13Sunday,
August 14The Midnight Salesmen8 p.m.2 p.m.Shrink  to Fit8 p.m.2 p.m.Casting the Villain Aside2 p.m.8 p.m.

　The graph above shows the plastic packaging waste treatments in EU countries in 2016. ① Among the six countries represented in the graph, Germany had the highest amount of both recycling and energy recovery while France had the highest amount of landfill. ② In the United Kingdom, the combined amount of energy recovery and landfill was more than half the total amount of plastic packaging waste treated. ③ In Italy, plastic packaging waste recycled and plastic packaging waste recovered for energy each amounted to more than 800 thousand tons. ④ The amount of plastic packaging waste used for energy recovery in France was more than four times that of Spain. ⑤ The total amount of plastic packaging waste treated in Poland was less than the amount of plastic packaging waste recycled in the United Kingdom.

26. Eric Carle에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지  않는 것은? Eric Carle was an American writer and illustrator of children’s literature. Born in Syracuse, New York, in 1929,
he moved with his parents to Germany when he was six years old. He was educated there, and graduated from an art school in Stuttgart, Germany. He moved back to the United States and worked as a graphic designer at The New York Times. In the mid­1960s, children’s author Bill Martin Jr. asked Carle to illustrate a book  he  was  writing.  In  1967, they published their first collaboration: Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See? His best­known work, The Very Hungry Caterpillar, has been translated into more than 66 languages and sold over 50 million copies. In 2002, Carle and his wife opened the Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art, which collects and features the work of children’s book illustrators from around the world.
① 독일에서 예술 학교를 졸업했다.
② The New York Times에서 그래픽 디자이너로 일했다.
③ 1960년대 초반에 Bill Martin Jr.와의 첫 합작품을 출판했다.
④ TheVeryHungryCaterpillar는 66개가 넘는 언어로 번역되었다.
⑤ 아내와 Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art를 개관했다.






① 3일간 진행된다.
② The Black Box Theater에서 열린다.
③ Shrink to Fit은 8월 13일과 14일에 상연된다.
④ 조기 예매 시 관람료는 연극당 15달러이다.
⑤ 10세 미만의 어린이는 입장할 수 없다.

28. Newport Hackathon 2022에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 금요일  하루  동안 진행된다.
② 개인으로는  참가할  수 없다.
③ 8월 31일부터 참가 등록이 시작된다.
④ 주제는 행사 당일에 공지된다.
⑤ 제출하는 영상의 길이는 5분 이상이어야 한다.



영어 영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The spider chart, also called a radar chart, is a form of line graph. It helps the researcher to represent their data in a chart ① that shows the relative size of a response on one scale for interrelated variables. Like the bar chart, the data needs to have one scale which is common to all variables. The spider chart is drawn with the variables spanning the chart, ② creating a spider web. An example of this is seen in a research study looking at self­reported confidence in year 7 students across a range of subjects ③ have taught in their first term in secondary school. The researcher takes the responses from a sample group and ④ calculates the mean to plot on the spider chart. The spider chart allows the researcher to easily compare and contrast the confidence level in different subjects for the sample group. The chart, like the pie chart, can then be broken down for different groups of students within the study ⑤ to elicit further analysis of findings.








30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　In poorer countries many years of fast growth may be necessary to bring living standards up to acceptable levels. But growth is the means to achieve desired goals, not the
① end in itself. In the richer world the whole idea of growth ─ at  least  as  conventionally  measured ─ may  need  to  be
② maintained. In economies where services dominate, goods and services tailored to our ③ individual needs will be what determine the advance of our societies. These could be anything from genome­specific medicines to personalized care or tailored suits. That is different from more and more stuff, an arms race of growth. Instead, it means improvements in ④ quality, something that GDP is ill equipped to measure. Some fifty years ago one US economist contrasted what he called the “cowboy” economy, bent on production, exploitation of resources, and pollution, with the “spaceman” economy, in which quality and complexity replaced “throughput” as the measure of success. The ⑤ move from manufacturing to services and from analog to digital is the shift from cowboy to spaceman. But we are still measuring the size of the lasso.
* throughput: (일정 시간 내에 해야 할) 처리량
** lasso:  (카우보이가 야생마를 잡는 데 사용하는)  올가미 밧줄

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. There is a difference between a newsworthy event and news. A newsworthy event will not necessarily become news, just as news is often about an event that is not, in itself, newsworthy. We can define news as an event that is recorded in the news media, regardless of whether it is about a newsworthy event. The very fact of its transmission means that it is regarded as news, even if we struggle to understand why that particular story has been selected from all the other events happening at the same time that have been ignored. News selection is 	so not all events seen as newsworthy by some people will make it to the news. All journalists are familiar with the scenario where they are approached by someone with the words ‘I’ve got a great story for you’. For them, it is a major news event, but for the journalist it might be something to ignore.
① subjective	② passive	③ straightforward
④ consistent	⑤ crucial








32. Infants’ preference for looking at new things is so strong that psychologists began to realize that they could use it as a test of infants’ visual discrimination, and  even  their  memory. Could an infant tell the difference between  two similar images? Between two similar shades of the same color? Could an infant recall having seen something an hour, a day, a week ago? 	held the answer. If the infant’s gaze lingered, it suggested that the infant could tell that a similar image was nonetheless different in some way. If the infant, after a week without seeing an image, didn’t look at it much when it was shown again, the infant must be able at  some  level  to remember having seen it the week before. In most cases, the results revealed that infants were more cognitively capable earlier than had been previously assumed. The visual novelty drive became, indeed, one of the most powerful tools in psychologists’ toolkit, unlocking a host of deeper insights into the capacities of the infant mind.
① Memory distortion in infancy
② Undeveloped vision of newborns
③ The preference for social interaction
④ The inbuilt attraction to novel images
⑤ Infants’ communication skills with parents




6	영어 영역


33. Imagine there are two habitats, a rich one containing a lot of resources and a poor one containing few, and that there is no territoriality or fighting, so each individual is free to exploit the habitat in which it can achieve the higher pay­off, measured as rate of consumption of resource. With no competitors, an individual would simply go to the better of the two habitats and this is what we assume the first arrivals will do. But what about the later arrivals? As more competitors occupy the rich habitat, the resource will be depleted, and so less profitable for further newcomers. Eventually a point will be reached where the next arrivals will do better by occupying the poorer quality habitat where, although the resource is in shorter supply, there will be less competition. Thereafter, the two habitats should be filled so that the profitability for an individual is the same in each one. In other words, competitors should adjust their distribution in relation to habitat quality so that each individual 	.
① fails to find adequate resources in time
② invades the other habitat to get more resources
③ enjoys the same rate of acquisition of resources
④ needs to gather resources faster than newcomers
⑤ is more attracted to the rich habitat than the poor one




34. Neither Einstein’s relativity nor Bach’s fugues are such stuff as survival is made on. Yet each is a perfect example of human capacities that were essential to our having prevailed. The link between scientific aptitude and solving real­world challenges may be more apparent, but minds that reason with analogy and metaphor, minds that represent with color and texture, minds that imagine with melody and rhythm are minds that 	. Which is all just to say that the arts may well have been vital for developing the flexibility of thought and fluency of intuition that our relatives needed to fashion the spear, to invent cooking, to harness the wheel, and, later, to write the Mass in B Minor and, later still, to crack our rigid perspective on space and time. Across hundreds of thousands of years, artistic endeavors may have been the playground of human cognition, providing a safe arena for training our imaginative capacities and infusing them with a potent faculty for innovation. [3점]
* fugue: 서곡 ** the Mass in B Minor: B 단조 미사곡
① divert imagination away from innovation
② cultivate a more flourishing cognitive landscape
③ keep humans from developing intellectual capacities
④ exclude morality from scientific decision making
⑤ define a boundary between art and science
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Some forms of energy are more versatile in their usefulness than others. For example, we can use electricity for a myriad of applications, whereas the heat from burning coal is currently used mostly for stationary applications like generating power. ① When we turn the heat from burning coal into electricity, a substantial amount of energy is lost due to the inefficiency of the process. ② But we are willing to accept that loss because coal is relatively cheap, and it would be difficult and inconvenient  to use burning coal directly to power lights, computers, and refrigerators.
③ Finding an economical way to use coal to produce carbon fibers will help revitalize rural communities suffering from the decline in coal production. ④ In effect, we put a differing value on different forms of energy, with electricity at the top of the value ladder, liquid and gaseous fuels in the middle, and coal or firewood at the bottom. ⑤ Solar and wind technologies have an advantage in that they produce high­value electricity directly.
* versatile: 다용도의

[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) This is a prescription that is rife with danger, failing to provide an implementation rule and raising reactance. Much better is to say, “To help make sure that other people provide answers as useful as yours have been, when people ask you about this study, please tell them that you and another person answered some questions about each other.”
(B) For example, researchers have a choice of how to debrief research participants in an experiment involving some deception or omission of information. Often researchers attempt to commit the participant to silence, saying “Please don’t tell other potential participants that feedback from the other person was false.”
(C) Similarly, I once saw a delightful and unusual example of this principle at work in an art gallery. A fragile acrylic sculpture had a sign at the base saying, “Please touch with your eyes.” The command was clear, yet created much less reactance in me than “Don’t touch!” would have. [3점]
* reactance: 저항 ** rife: 가득한
*** debrief:  비밀[기밀]  준수 의무를 지우다[부여하다]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) This action is repeated over and over to navigate their web browsers to the desired web page or action until it becomes an  almost immediate, reflexive action. Malicious online actors take advantage of this behavior to distract the user from carefully examining the details of the web page that might tip off the user that there is something amiss about the website.
(B) The website is designed to focus the user’s attention on the action the malicious actor wants them to take (e.g., click a link) and to draw their attention away from any details that might suggest to the user that the website is not what it appears to be on the surface.
(C) This digital misdirection strategy relies on the fact that online users utilizing web browsers to visit websites have quickly learned that the most basic ubiquitous navigational action is to click on a link or button presented to them on a website.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.



　Most dreaming occurs during REM sleep. ( ① ) REM stands for Rapid Eye Movement, a stage of sleep discovered by Professor Nathaniel Kleitman at the University of Chicago in 1958. ( ② ) Along with a medical student, Eugene Aserinsky, he noted that when people are sleeping, they exhibit rapid eye movement, as if they were “looking” at something. ( ③ ) Ongoing research by Kleitman and Aserinsky concluded that it was during this period of rapid eye movement that people dream, yet their minds are as active as someone who is awake. ( ④ ) Interestingly enough, studies have found that along with rapid eye movement, our heart rates increase and our respiration is also elevated ? yet our bodies do not move and are basically paralyzed due to a nerve center in the brain that keeps our bodies motionless besides some occasional twitches and jerks. ( ⑤ ) To sum it up, during the REM dream state, your mind is busy but your body is at rest. [3점]
* twitch: 씰룩거림

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

38.



　Earliest indications of the need for inspiration for fashion direction are possibly evidenced by a number of British manufacturers visiting the United States in around 1825 where they were much inspired by lightweight wool blend fabrics produced for outerwear. The ready?to?wear sector was established much earlier in America than in Britain and with it came new challenges. ( ① ) Previously garments were custom?made by skilled individuals who later became known as or recognized as being  fashion designers. ( ② ) These handmade garments that are now accepted as being the fashion garments of that time were only made for those with the means to pay for them. ( ③ ) The lesser?privileged mass market wore homemade and handed down garments. ( ④ ) Later, by the end of the industrial revolution, fashion was more readily available and affordable to all classes. ( ⑤ ) Thus the direct communication link between the designer and client no longer existed and designers had to rely on anticipating the needs and desires of the new fashion consumer.








?
Losing weight is hard because people usually think they burned a (A)  number of calories than they actually did and (B) exercise by eating a lot of food.
(A) (B)
① larger	…… undo
② larger	…… intensify
③ higher	…… supplement
④ smaller …… continue
⑤ smaller …… delay




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 

　Not every disagreement is as easy to solve as our ducks?and?chickens experience. But to this day, my husband and I end many conflicts by agreeing to disagree. I’ll say, “It’s a chicken,” to which (b) he will reply, “It’s a duck.” Each of us is willing to compromise as we consider the different perspectives of the other and realize that both of us can be right. We even have a wooden chicken and duck displayed in our living room as a constant reminder of that day and to not take ourselves too seriously!
(C) 
　We could not believe our eyes! Indeed, in the same yard, a mama duck and three ducklings were playing in the water by the side of the road and, up near the farmhouse, there was a mama hen pecking the ground with her three baby chicks following suit. We immediately broke into uncontrollable laughter and pulled to the side of the road to gain our composure. Understandably, my husband’s perspective had been restricted to the road ahead while driving. My own perspective had narrowed to the sides of the road as
(c) I enjoyed the views of the horizon.

* composure: 침착함
(D) 





41. 윗글의  제목으로  가장 적절한 것은?
① How Street Posts Ruin the City  View
② Breakaway Posts Save Lives and Cost
③ Fewer Road Signs, Fewer Traffic Accidents
④ Recycled Materials Lead to Sustainable Cities
⑤ Dilemma Between Safety and Cost­efficiency

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　As we cruised the tree?canopied country road in our new car, my husband and I were savoring the unusual warmth of the early spring day until we passed an old farmhouse. “Did you see those ducks?” my husband asked. To which I replied, “Ducks? They were chickens!” “No, honey, (a) I am talking about the mama duck with the three ducklings!” “You mean the mama hen and the three chicks?” He retorted, “Honey, they were waddling with orange beaks!” “Oh, come on,” I said doubtfully. “They had yellow beaks with red crests.”
　
Believe it or not, this conversation continued for the next three miles and deteriorated to the point that I shouted, “I know the difference between a duck and a chicken!” “Then (d) I am turning this car around because I can’t believe you think you saw chickens!” “Good! Because I can’t believe (e) you think they were ducks,” I answered quickly. As we reached the top of the hill, the farmhouse came into view, and I quickly pointed up the hill to the yard of the farmhouse. “See, those are chickens!” At the same time, my husband was pointing to the roadside gully, saying, “See, those are ducks!”

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 남편과 나는 새 차를 타고 시골길을 지나갔다.
② 남편과 나는 거실에 나무로 된 닭과 오리를 진열해 놓았다.
③ 어미 오리와 세 마리의 새끼 오리가 물에서 놀고 있었다.
④ 운전 중 남편의 시야는 도로의 측면으로 제한되어 있었다.
⑤ 나는 언덕 위에서 농가의 마당을 가리켰다.



2023학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 비상 시 대피 장소를 안내하려고
② 버스 출발 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 차량 운행 중 안전벨트 착용을 당부하려고
④ 버스 내 휴대 전화 통화 자제를 요청하려고
⑤ 차량 내 무선 인터넷 연결 방법을 설명하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오를 듣는 것은 행복감을 높여 준다.
② 인터넷 발달은 라디오의 대중화에 기여한다.
③ 노년층을 위한 멀티미디어 교육이 필요하다.
④ 대화할 때는 상대방의 말을 경청하는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 라디오 프로그램 편성 시 청취 연령을 고려해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건축가 － 건물 주인	② 코딩 강사 － 수강생
③ 영양사 － 과일 도매상	④ 음식 평론가 － 요리사
⑤ 홍보 회사 직원－ 과일 농장 주인

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 현수막 걸기	② 의자 배치하기
③ 카메라 설치하기	④ 디제이 일정 조율하기
⑤ 마이크 상태 확인하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $45	② $54	③ $63	④ $65	⑤ $70







7. 대화를  듣고, 여자가  밴드  오디션에  참가하지  않은 이유를 고르시오.
① 기타에 문제가 생겨서
② 몸 상태가 좋지 않아서
③ 졸업 시험을 치러야 해서
④ 취업 면접 일정과 겹쳐서
⑤ 가족 행사에 참여해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Kint Chocolate Museum에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 위치	② 개관 시간	③ 입장료
④ 선물 가게	⑤ 휴관일

9. Endangered Animals Photo Exhibition에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 3주 동안 지속된다.
② 멸종 위기 동물들의 사진 100장이 전시된다.
③ 사진 속 동물들이 멸종 위기에 처한 이유가 설명되어 있다.
④ 수익금 전액은 동물 보호 센터에 기부될 것이다.
⑤ 멸종 위기 동물 포스터를 무료로 제공할 것이다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 기내 휴대용 가방을 고르시오.
Carry-On Bags for Kids


①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I broke the bottles by accident.
② Sure. Let’s remove the labels together.
③ You shouldn’t. Your hands are still dirty.
④ I agree. Recycled paper bags are cheaper.
⑤ No problem. I’m going to order some bottles.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sounds wonderful! That fits our budget.
② Terrific! I’m glad we’re done with the project.
③ Too bad. There’s no ticket available for your trip.
④ Okay. I’ll reschedule the meeting and let you know.
⑤ Thanks for offering. I’ll be happy to join your team.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Of course. I accept the instructor position.
② Great. Let me sign up for the 8 p.m. class, then.
③ Please write your name down on the waiting list.
④ Thanks for the refund of my class registration fee.
⑤ Sounds exciting. Good luck on your ballet performance.



14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Thanks for telling me. I’ll call her and apologize.
② Good idea. Don’t forget to bring your tennis shoes.
③ Not really. The match wasn’t as good as I expected.
④ Fine. Promise me you’ll do your best to win the match.
⑤ I understand. I’ll give you more time to finish the series.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Randy가 Angela에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Randy:   	
① Why don’t you find members to form a drone racing club?
② I think you should become friends with the transfer student.
③ Practice more if you want to participate in the next race.
④ Safety comes first when it comes to flying drones.
⑤ How about buying a drone of your own?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① positive effects of plants on insects
② diverse purposes of plant communication
③ different methods for controlling toxic chemicals
④ key aspects of non-verbal human communication
⑤ important roles of plants in balancing the food chain



17. 언급된 식물이 아닌 것은?
① cotton plants	② mustard plants	③ pine trees
④ tomato plants	⑤ walnut trees





18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Natalie Talley,
My name is Olivia Spikes, the mayor of Millstown. Before you attend the world championships next month, on behalf of everyone in Millstown, I wish to let you know that we are supporting you all the way. As you are the first famous figure skater from Millstown, we are all big fans of yours. Our community was so proud of you for winning the national championships last year. Your amazing performance really moved us all. We all believe that you are going to impress the entire nation again. Your hometown supporters will cheer for you whenever you perform on the ice. Good luck!
Best wishes, Olivia Spikes
① 지역 사회 홍보 대사로 활동해 줄 것을 제안하려고
② 이웃 도시와 예정된 친선 경기 취소를 통보하려고
③ 지역 사회 출신 피겨 스케이팅 선수를 응원하려고
④ 시청에서 주관하는 연례 자선 행사를 홍보하려고
⑤ 피겨 스케이팅 경기장 건립을 위한 기부를 요청하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Nathan의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　“Daddy!” Jenny called, waving a yellow crayon in her little hand. Nathan approached her, wondering why she was calling him. Jenny, his three-year-old toddler, was drawing a big circle on a piece of paper. “What are you doing, Sweetie?” Nathan asked with interest. She just kept drawing without reply. He continued watching her, wondering what she was working on. She was drawing something that looked like a face. When she finished it, Jenny shouted, “Look, Daddy!” She held her artwork up proudly. Taking a closer look, Nathan recognized that it was his face. The face had two big eyes and a beard just like his. He loved Jenny’s work. Filled with joy and happiness, Nathan gave her a big hug.
* toddler: 아장아장 걷는 아이
① sorrowful → relieved	② frustrated → satisfied
③ worried	→ scared	④ curious	→ delighted
⑤ hopeful	→ disappointed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Becoming competent in another culture means looking beyond behavior to see if we can understand the attitudes, beliefs, and values that motivate what we observe. By looking only at the visible aspects of culture ― customs, clothing,  food, and language ― we develop a short-sighted view of intercultural understanding ― just the tip of the iceberg, really. If we are to be successful in our business interactions with people who have different values and beliefs about how the world is ordered, then we must go below the surface of what it means to understand culture and attempt to see what Edward Hall calls the “hidden dimensions.” Those hidden aspects are the very foundation of culture and are the reason why culture  is actually more than meets the eye. We tend not to notice  those cultural norms until they violate what we consider to be common sense, good judgment, or the nature of things.
① 타 문화 사람들과 교류를 잘하려면 그 문화의 이면을 알아야 한다.
② 문화 배경이 다른 직원과 협업할 때 공정하게 업무를 나눠야 한다.
③ 여러 문화에 대한 이해를 통해 공동체 의식을 길러야 한다.
④ 원만한 대인 관계를 위해서는 서로의 공통점을 우선 파악해야 한다.
⑤ 문화적 갈등을 줄이려면 구성원 간의 소통을 활성화해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 send us off into different far corners of the library 가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　You may feel there is something scary about an algorithm deciding what you might like. Could it mean that, if computers conclude you won’t like something, you will never get the chance to see it? Personally, I really enjoy being directed toward new music that I might not have found by myself. I can quickly get stuck in a rut where I put on the same songs over and over. That’s why I’ve always enjoyed the radio. But the algorithms that are now pushing and pulling me through the music library are perfectly suited to finding gems that I’ll like. My worry originally about such algorithms was that they  might drive everyone into certain parts of the library, leaving others lacking listeners. Would they cause a convergence of tastes? But thanks to the nonlinear and chaotic mathematics usually behind them, this doesn’t happen. A small divergence in my likes compared to yours can send us off into different   far corners of the library.
* rut: 관습, 틀  ** gem: 보석  *** divergence: 갈라짐
① lead us to music selected to suit our respective tastes
② enable us to build connections with other listeners
③ encourage us to request frequent updates for algorithms
④ motivate us to search for talented but unknown musicians
⑤ make us ignore our preferences for particular music genres






22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Historically, drafters of tax legislation are attentive to questions of economics and history, and less attentive to moral questions. Questions of morality are often pushed to the side in legislative debate, labeled too controversial, too difficult to answer, or, worst of all, irrelevant to the project. But, in fact, the moral questions of taxation are at the very heart of the creation of tax laws. Rather than irrelevant, moral questions are fundamental to the imposition of tax. Tax is the application of a society’s theories of distributive justice. Economics can go a long way towards helping a legislature determine whether or not a particular tax law will help achieve a particular goal, but economics cannot, in a vacuum, identify the goal. Creating tax policy requires identifying a moral goal, which is a task that must involve ethics and moral analysis.
* legislation: 입법 ** imposition: 부과
① 분배 정의를 실현하려면 시민 단체의 역할이 필요하다.
② 사회적 합의는 민주적인 정책 수립의 선행 조건이다.
③ 성실한 납세는 안정적인 정부 예산 확보의 기반이 된다.
④ 경제학은 세법을 개정할 때 이론적 근거를 제공한다.
⑤ 세법을 만들 때 도덕적 목표를 설정하는 것이 중요하다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Environmental learning occurs when farmers base decisions on observations of “payoff” information. They may observe their own or neighbors’ farms, but it is the empirical results they are using as a guide, not the neighbors themselves. They are looking at farming activities as experiments and assessing such factors as relative advantage, compatibility with existing resources, difficulty of use, and “trialability” ― how well can it be experimented with. But that criterion of “trialability” turns out to be a real problem; it’s true that farmers are always experimenting, but working farms are very flawed laboratories. Farmers cannot set up the controlled conditions of professional test plots in research facilities. Farmers also often confront complex and difficult-to-observe phenomena that would be hard to manage even if they could run controlled experiments. Moreover farmers can rarely acquire payoff information on more than a few of the production methods they might use, which makes the criterion of “relative advantage” hard to measure.
* empirical: 경험적인 ** compatibility: 양립성
*** criterion: 기준
① limitations of using empirical observations in farming
② challenges in modernizing traditional farming equipment
③ necessity of prioritizing trialability in agricultural innovation
④ importance of making instinctive decisions in agriculture
⑤ ways to control unpredictable agricultural phenomena


24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Not only musicians and psychologists, but also committed music enthusiasts and experts often voice the opinion that the beauty of music lies in an expressive deviation from the exactly defined score. Concert performances become interesting and gain in attraction from the fact that they go far beyond the information printed in the score. In his early studies on musical performance, Carl Seashore discovered that musicians only rarely play two equal notes in exactly the same way. Within the same metric structure, there is a wide potential of variations in tempo, volume, tonal quality and intonation. Such variation is based on the composition but diverges from it individually. We generally call this ‘expressivity’. This explains why we do not lose interest when we hear different artists perform the same piece of music. It also explains why it is worthwhile for following generations to repeat the same repertoire. New, inspiring interpretations help us to expand our understanding, which serves to enrich and animate the music scene.
* deviation: 벗어남
① How to Build a Successful Career in Music Criticism
② Never the Same: The Value of Variation in Music Performance
③ The Importance of Personal Expression in Music Therapy
④ Keep Your Cool: Overcoming Stage Fright When Playing Music
⑤ What’s New in the Classical Music Industry?


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. 2022 K-Tea Culture Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
















　The graph above shows the top four  European  countries with the most renewable energy generation capacity in 2011 and in  2020.  ① Each of the four countries in the graph had  a higher capacity to  generate  renewable energy in 2020 than its respective capacity in 2011. ② Germany’s capacity to generate renewable energy in 2011 reached more than 50.0 gigawatts, which was also the case in 2020. ③ Among the countries above, Spain ranked in second place in terms of renewable energy generation capacity in 2011 and remained in second place in 2020. ④ The renewable energy generation capacity  of Italy in 2020 was lower than that of Spain in the same    year. ⑤ The renewable energy generation capacity of France was higher than that of Italy in both 2011 and 2020.
* decimal: 소수의



26. Leon Festinger에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Leon Festinger was an American social psychologist. He was born in New York City in 1919 to a Russian immigrant family. As a graduate student at the University of Iowa, Festinger was
influenced by Kurt Lewin, a leading social psychologist. After graduating from there, he became a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1945. He later moved to Stanford University, where he continued his work in social psychology. His theory of social comparison earned him a good reputation. Festinger actively participated in international scholarly cooperation. In the late 1970s, he turned his interest to the field of history. He was one of the most cited psychologists of the twentieth century. Festinger’s theories still play an important role in psychology today.
① 러시아인 이민자 가정에서 태어났다.
② 사회 심리학자 Kurt Lewin에게 영향을 받았다.
③ Stanford University에서 사회 심리학 연구를 중단했다.
④ 국제 학술 협력에 활발하게 참여했다.
⑤ 1970년대 후반에 역사 분야로 관심을 돌렸다.

2022 K-Tea Culture Program
　Evergreen Tea Society invites you to the second annual K-Tea Culture Program! Come and enjoy a refreshing cup of tea and learn about traditional Korean tea culture.
Program Includes:
1) Watching a short video about the history of Korean tea culture
2) Observing a demonstration of a traditional Korean tea-ceremony (dado)
3) Participating in the ceremony yourself
　4) Tasting a selection of teas along with cookies When: Saturday, September 24, 3:00 p.m.?5:00 p.m. Where: Evergreen Culture Center
Participation Fee: $20 per person (traditional teacup included)
　Reservations should be made online (www.egtsociety.or.kr) at least one day before your visit.
① 한국의 차 문화 역사에 관한 영상을 시청한다.
② 한국 전통 다도 시연을 본다.
③ 쿠키와 함께 차를 맛본다.
④ 참가비에는 전통 찻잔이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 예약은 방문 일주일 전까지 해야 한다.

28. Career Day with a Big Data Expert에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Career Day with a Big Data Expert
　Meet a Big Data expert from a leading IT company! Jill Johnson, famous data analyst and bestselling author, will be visiting Sovenhill High School to give a lecture on careers related to Big Data.
Participation:
Sovenhill High School students only
Limited to 50 students
When & Where:
October 15, 10:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m.
Library
Registration: Scan the QR code to fill in
the application form.
Note:
Drinking beverages is not permitted during the lecture.
The lecture will be followed by a Q&A session.
All participants will receive a free copy of the lecturer’s book.
① 학부모도 참여할 수 있다.
② 참석 인원에 제한이 없다.
③ QR  코드를 스캔하여 신청서를 작성한다.
④ 강연 중에 음료수를 마실 수 있다.
⑤ 참석자 중 일부만 강연자의 책을 무료로 받는다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Recognizing ethical issues is the most important step in understanding business ethics. An ethical issue is an identifiable problem, situation, or opportunity that requires a person to choose from among several actions that may ① be evaluated as right or wrong, ethical or unethical. ② Learn how to choose from alternatives and make a decision requires not only good personal values, but also knowledge competence in the business area of concern. Employees also need to know when to rely on their organizations’ policies and codes of ethics or ③ have discussions with co-workers or managers on appropriate conduct. Ethical decision making is not always easy because there are always gray areas ④ that create dilemmas, no matter how decisions are made. For instance, should an employee report on a co-worker engaging in time theft? Should a salesperson leave out facts about a product’s poor safety record in his presentation to a customer? Such questions require the decision maker to evaluate the ethics of his or her choice and decide ⑤ whether to ask for guidance.












30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Although the wonders of modern technology have provided people with opportunities beyond the wildest dreams of our ancestors, the good, as usual, is weakened by a downside. One of those downsides is that anyone who so chooses can pick up the virtual megaphone that is the Internet and put in their two cents on any of an infinite number of topics,  regardless  of their ① qualifications. After all, on the Internet, there are no regulations ② preventing a kindergarten teacher from offering medical advice or a physician from suggesting ways to safely make structural changes to your home. As a result, misinformation gets disseminated as information, and it is not always easy to
③ differentiate the two. This can be particularly frustrating for scientists, who spend their lives learning how to understand  the intricacies of the world around them, only to have their work summarily ④ challenged by people whose experience with the topic can be measured in minutes. This frustration is then ⑤ diminished by the fact that, to the general public, both the scientist and the challenger are awarded equal credibility.
* put in one’s two cents: 의견을 말하다 ** disseminate: 퍼뜨리다
*** intricacy: 복잡성

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. More than just having territories, animals also partition them. And this insight turned out to be particularly useful for zoo husbandry. An animal’s territory has an internal arrangement that Heini Hediger compared to the inside of a person’s house. Most of us assign separate functions to  separate rooms, but even if you look  at  a  one-room  house you will find the same internal specialization. In a  cabin  or  a mud hut, or even a Mesolithic cave from 30,000 years ago, this part is for cooking, that part is for sleeping; this part is for making  tools  and  weaving,  that  part  is  for  waste.  We keep
 	. To a varying extent, other animals do the same. A part of an animal’s territory is for eating, a part for sleeping, a part for swimming or wallowing,  a part may be set aside for waste, depending on the species of animal.
* husbandry: 관리
① an interest in close neighbors
② a neat functional organization
③ a stock of emergency supplies
④ a distance from potential rivals
⑤ a strictly observed daily routine









32. Fans feel for feeling’s own sake. They make meanings beyond what seems to be on offer. They build identities and experiences, and make artistic creations of their own to share with others. A person can be an individual fan, feeling an “idealized connection with a star, strong feelings of memory and nostalgia,” and engaging in activities like “collecting to develop a sense of self.” But, more often, individual experiences are embedded in social contexts where other people with shared attachments socialize  around the  object  of their affections. Much of the pleasure of fandom
 	. In their diaries, Bostonians of the 1800s described being part of the crowds at concerts as part of the pleasure of attendance. A compelling argument can be made that what fans love is less the object of their fandom than the attachments to (and differentiations from) one another that those affections afford.
* embed: 끼워 넣다 ** compelling: 강력한
① is enhanced by collaborations between global stars
② results from frequent personal contact with a star
③ deepens as fans age together with their idols
④ comes from being connected to other fans
⑤ is heightened by stars’ media appearances


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. There was nothing modern about the idea of men making women’s clothes ― we saw them doing it for centuries in the past. In the old days, however, the client was always primary and her tailor was an obscure craftsman, perhaps talented but perhaps not. She had her own ideas like any patron, there were no fashion plates, and the tailor was simply at her service, perhaps with helpful suggestions about what others were wearing. Beginning in the late nineteenth century, with the hugely successful rise of the artistic male couturier, it was the designer who became celebrated, and the client elevated by his inspired attention. In a climate of admiration for male artists and their female creations, the dress-designer first flourished as the same sort of creator. Instead of the old rule that dressmaking is a craft, 	was invented that had not been there before. [3점]
* obscure: 무명의 ** patron: 후원자
*** couturier: 고급 여성복 디자이너
① a profitable industry driving fast fashion
② a widespread respect for marketing skills
③ a public institution preserving traditional designs
④ a modern connection between dress-design and art
⑤ an efficient system for producing affordable clothing






34. In trying to explain how different disciplines attempt to understand autobiographical memory the literary critic Daniel Albright said, “Psychology is a garden, literature is a wilderness.” He meant, I believe, that psychology seeks to make patterns, find regularity, and ultimately impose order on human experience and behavior. Writers, by contrast, dive into the unruly, untamed depths of human experiences. What he said about understanding memory can be extended to our questions about young children’s minds. If we psychologists are too bent on identifying the orderly pattern, the regularities of children’s minds, we may miss an essential and pervasive characteristic of our topic: the child’s more unruly and imaginative ways of talking and thinking. It is not only the developed writer or literary scholar who seems drawn toward a somewhat wild and idiosyncratic way of thinking; young children are as well. The psychologist interested in young children may have to
 	   in order to get a good picture of how children think. [3점]
* unruly: 제멋대로 구는 ** pervasive: 널리 퍼져 있는
*** idiosyncratic: 색다른
① venture a little more often into the wilderness
② help them recall their most precious memories
③ better understand the challenges of parental duty
④ disregard the key characteristics of children’s fiction
⑤ standardize the paths of their psychological development
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Because plants tend to recover from disasters more quickly than animals, they are essential to the revitalization of  damaged environments. Why do plants have this preferential ability to recover from disaster? It is largely because, unlike animals, they can generate new organs and tissues throughout their life cycle. ① This ability is due to the activity of plant meristems ― regions of undifferentiated tissue in roots and shoots that can, in response to specific cues, differentiate into new tissues and organs. ② If meristems are not damaged during disasters, plants can recover and ultimately transform the destroyed or barren environment. ③ You can see this phenomenon on a smaller scale when a tree struck by lightning forms new branches that grow from the old scar. ④ In the form of forests and grasslands, plants regulate the cycling of water and adjust the chemical composition of the atmosphere. ⑤ In addition to regeneration or resprouting of plants, disturbed areas can also recover through reseeding.
* revitalization: 소생




[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) Then the upper gates open and the ship passes through. For downstream passage, the process works the opposite way. The ship enters the lock from the upper level, and water is pumped from the lock until the ship is in line  with the lower level.
(B) When a vessel is going upstream, the upper gates stay closed as the ship enters the lock at the lower water level. The downstream gates are then closed and more water is pumped into the basin. The rising water lifts the vessel to the level of the upper body of water.
(C) To  make up for the difference in level, engineers build  one or more water “steps,” called locks, that carry ships  or boats up or down between the two levels. A lock is an artificial water basin. It has a long rectangular shape with concrete walls and a pair of gates at each end.
* rectangular: 직사각형의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.


(A) In some cases, however, we are far less aware of why we believe a certain claim to be true, or how we are to  explain why certain social realities exist. Ideas about the social world become part of our worldview without our necessarily being aware of the source of the  particular idea or that we even hold the idea at all.
(B) When we have to offer an account of our actions, we consciously understand which excuses might prove acceptable, given the particular circumstances we find ourselves in. In such situations, we use cultural ideas as  we would use a particular tool.
(C) We select the cultural notion as we would select a screwdriver: certain jobs call for a Phillips head while others require an Allen wrench. Whichever idea we insert into the conversation to justify our actions, the point is  that our motives are discursively available to us. They are not hidden. [3점]
* cognizant: 인식하는 ** discursively: 만연하게
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.


　Each new wave of technology is intended to enhance user convenience, as well as improve security, but sometimes these do not necessarily go hand-in-hand. For example, the  transition from magnetic stripe to embedded chip slightly slowed down transactions, sometimes frustrating customers in a hurry. ( ① ) Make a service too burdensome, and the potential customer will go elsewhere. ( ② ) This obstacle applies at several levels. ( ③ ) Passwords, double-key  identification,  and biometrics such as fingerprint-, iris-, and voice recognition are all ways of keeping the account details hidden from potential fraudsters, of keeping your data dark. ( ④ ) But they all inevitably add a burden to the use of the account. ( ⑤ ) This is all useful at some level ― indeed, it can be reassuring knowing that your bank is keeping  alert to  protect you ― but it becomes tiresome if too many such calls are received. [3점]
* fraud: 사기

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

In particular, they define a group as two or more people who interact with, and exert mutual influences on, each other.
　In everyday life, we tend to see any collection of people as   a group. ( ① ) However, social psychologists use this term more precisely. ( ② ) It is this sense of mutual interaction or inter-dependence for a common purpose which distinguishes the members of a group from a mere aggregation  of individuals. ( ③ )  For example,  as Kenneth  Hodge observed,  a collection of people who happen to go for a swim after work on the same day each week does not, strictly speaking, constitute a group because these swimmers do not interact with each other in  a structured manner.  (  ④ )  By contrast,  a squad of young competitive swimmers who train every morning before going to school is a group because they not only share   a common objective (training for competition) but also interact with each other in formal ways (e.g., by warming up together beforehand). ( ⑤ )  It is this sense of people coming together to achieve a common objective that defines a “team”.
* exert: 발휘하다 ** aggregation: 집합














Depending on the  (A)  of a project, the capacity of designers to       (B)       team-based working environments can be just as important as their personal qualities.
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① size …… coordinate	② cost…… systematize
③ size …… identify	④ cost…… innovate
⑤ goal…… investigate


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 


41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Differing Attitudes Towards Current Climate Issues
② Slow but Significant: The History of Ecological Movements
③ The Silence of Imagination in Representing Climate Change
④ Vivid Threats: Climate Disasters Spreading in Local Areas
⑤ The Rise and Fall of Environmentalism and Ecocriticism

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Emilia와 Layla는 유럽 여행 중이었다.
② Layla는 Emilia에게 Liverpool로 가자고 제안했다.
③ Emilia는 기차를 점심 식사 전에 타자고 말했다.
④ National Gallery에는 van Gogh의 Sunflowers가 없었다.
⑤ Emilia는 van Gogh의 Sunflowers를 좋아했다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2021학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 사진 동아리 부원을 모집하려고
② 동물원 견학 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 동물 사진을 찍는 요령을 알려 주려고
④ 동물원 관람 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 새로 출시된 카메라의 사용법을 설명하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 개인 이메일 계정을 업무용으로 사용하지 말아야 한다.
② 환경을 보호하기 위해 종이 우편물을 줄일 필요가 있다.
③ 출처가 불분명한 이메일의 첨부 파일을 열어서는 안 된다.
④ 탄소 배출량 감소를 위해 불필요한 이메일을 삭제해야 한다.
⑤ 개인 정보 유출을 방지하기 위해 휴면 계정을 정리해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 환경 운동가 - 기자	② 고객 - 청소업체 직원
③ 집주인 - 실내 디자이너	④ 건축가 - 건축 자재 판매자
⑤ 지역 주민 - 건설 현장 직원

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 무대 조명 점검하기	② 사회자에게 연락하기
③ 피아노 위치 조정하기	④ 무선 마이크 가져가기
⑤ 참가자에게 공연 순서 알리기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $26	② $28	③ $30	④ $34	⑤ $36


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 전자책을 사려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 글자 크기를 조절할 수 있어서
② 종이책 재고가 부족해서
③ 휴대하기가 편리해서
④ 종이책보다 가격이 저렴해서
⑤ 서점에 가지 않고 구매할 수 있어서

8. 대화를 듣고, Central Flower Market에 관해 언급되지 않은 것 을 고르시오.
① 운영 시간	② 위치	③ 휴무 요일
④ 주차 요금	⑤ 입점 매장 수

9. 2021 Robinson Fishing Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일 치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10월 22일부터 23일까지 개최된다.
② 대회 장소는 Silver Cloud 호수이다.
③ 1등 상품은 고급 낚싯대 한 세트이다.
④ 잡은 물고기의 수를 기준으로 심사한다.
⑤ 대회가 끝난 후에 호수를 청소하는 행사가 있다.

10.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  주문할  와플  메이 커를 고르시오.
Waffle Makers


①
②
③
④
⑤


1.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Thank you. Please let me know if you find it.
② Don’t worry. I can find your house by myself.
③ Why don’t you try it on? It’ll look nice on you.
④ I’m sorry. I don’t think I can make it to your party.
⑤ I think you’re right. The baseball cap doesn’t fit me.

12.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Be careful. You might get an electric shock.
② Oh, I see. Then I’ll go get some new ones now.
③ Great. The bathroom is much brighter than before.
④ All right. I’ll replace the garage light bulb right now.
⑤ Never mind. I’ll come back when the items are in stock.




2	영어 영역



13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I’m sorry I can’t join the design project this time.
② Traditional culture can be a great source of creativity.
③ Our preference should be quality over brand and price.
④ I’ll change the pattern of the dress as you suggested.
⑤ We should have handed in the assignment on time.



14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Great. I can’t wait to open the boxes myself.
② Right. I’ll ask about replacing it with a new one.
③ Yes. You should return the product within a week.
④ Sorry. The delivery will be a little later than usual.
⑤ No problem. I’ve already moved all the boxes for you.



15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Sarah가  Emily에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Sarah: Emily,  	
① you should rinse plastic containers before recycling them.
② I want you to do your laundry by yourself more often.
③ our recycling center requires us to remove the labels.
④ we need to refill these containers with some fruits.
⑤ you have to wipe the table right after you eat.



[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the origins of national sports teams’ nicknames
② the ways countries choose their capital cities
③ city nicknames and how they came to be
④ commonly confused capital cities in the world
⑤ famous tourist attractions and their economic value



17.언급된 도시가 아닌 것은?
① Rome	② Paris	③ Singapore
④ Sydney	⑤ Seattle

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 문의받은 직원이 채용에 적합함을 알려 주려고
② 위탁 판매 요청을 수락한 것에 감사하려고
③ 동료 직원의 승진을 축하하고 격려하려고
④ 회사 내 업무 조정 결과를 공지하려고
⑤ 결원에 따른 인원 충원을 건의하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Off I went in the dark, headed to the top of Kilimanjaro. Some sections were so steep that I had to make zigzags to make it easy on my oxygen deprived body. All the energy I had went to breathing. My body felt like a dead weight. I almost gave up, with the summit just around the corner. My guide responded to my exhaustion, saying, “Go slow and steady, just one step at a time”. I followed his words. I made it to Uhuru Peak, known as the very top of Kilimanjaro. Indeed, I saw the incredible, unforgettable sunrise! The beauty, the teamwork, and the accomplishment of a personal life goal were worth all the sacrifice and strain. Mt. Kilimanjaro was worth the climb!
① bored → curious	② grateful → regretful
③ confident → nervous	④ frustrated → satisfied
⑤ surprised → disappointed

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We can’t begin to build a strategy for our lives without first understanding where we are and where we want to go. Since people are different, it’s reasonable to assume their current situations or starting points will be different as well. That’s why books that tout a single formula for success or improvement, without taking into account the different places people are starting from, are worthless. Would you trust a doctor who didn’t ask any questions or run any tests to diagnose what was wrong, yet wrote you a prescription anyway? In medicine, the adage is Prescription without diagnosis equals malpractice. Before we can “prescribe” strategy, we first need to diagnose the situation ─ where we stand, where we are today.

* tout: 권유하다 ** adage: 격언
① 자신의 현재 상황을 파악한 후에 전략을 세워야 한다.
② 다른 사람의 능력을 인정하고 배울 줄 알아야 한다.
③ 상황이 바뀌어도 처음 세운 원칙을 고수해야 한다.
④ 서두르지 말고 작은 목표부터 단계별로 달성해야 한다.
⑤ 한 가지 방식만 고집하지 말고 다양한 시도를 해야 한다.

영어 영역	3

21.밑줄  친  we  have “confusion  at  the  frontier”가  다음  글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Two independent research groups have discovered that we have “confusion at the frontier” when we search the Internet. Adrian Ward, a psychologist at the University of Texas, found that engaging in Internet searches increased people’s cognitive self­esteem, their sense of their own ability to remember and process information. Moreover, people who searched the Internet for facts they didn’t know and were later asked where they found the information often misremembered and reported that they had known it all along. Many of them completely forgot ever having conducted the search. They gave themselves the credit instead of the Internet. In a different set of studies, researchers found that those who had searched the Internet to answer specific questions rated their ability to answer unrelated questions as higher than those who had not. The act of searching the Internet and finding answers to one set of questions caused the participants to increase their sense that they knew the answers to all questions, including those whose answers they had not researched.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The most enduring lessons have to be learnt from the seismic response of ground and the built environment in the largest natural laboratory, i.e., the earth, from damage observations in all earthquakes, whether inter­ or intra­plate. Complete protection of all life and the entire built environment in all earthquakes is still a distant dream. However, efforts are on to have a built environment in which loss of life is minimized, and lifelines and infrastructure continue to function during and after an earthquake disaster. Construction activities in seismically prone and hazardous areas that are vulnerable to different damaging effects of earthquakes are best avoided. Most of the time such situations are unavoidable; in that case appropriate strengthening measures are required. Structures should be preferably made on firm ground. For construction in soft soil, the ground should be strengthened, and the foundations should be sufficiently deep, wide, and strong. Subsequently, application of appropriate interventions regarding earthquake­resistant design of structures goes a long way in saving human lives.

① we tend to overestimate our knowledge and ability
② we are prone to putting off making final decisions
③ we often forget how easily we lose our self­esteem
④ we are overwhelmed by a vast amount of information
⑤ we strive to distinguish false information from the truth


2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A visual scene can set up our emotional response. Suspense is driven by a sense of calm with the anticipation of impending terror. Indeed, anticipation or expectations play a key role in driving our emotions. The Russian silent filmmaker Lev Kuleshov considered such contextual influences. He interspersed shots of an actor exhibiting a neutral expression with shots of a child’s coffin or a plate of soup. This same “neutral” expression was interpreted differently depending on what image preceded it. Thus, the same expression appeared to show sorrow or hunger, depending on the context. Psychological studies of the Kuleshov effect have confirmed the impact of the social context on emotion. For example, if a person smiles at you and then the smile turns into a neutral expression, that person will appear somewhat grumpy or disappointed. Conversely, if a person first looks angry and then the expression turns into a neutral expression, the person looks somewhat pleasant or positive.
* intersperse: (~ 사이에) 배치하다 ** grumpy: 기분이 언짢은
① 영상과 음향의 대비가 긴장감을 조성한다.
② 사회적 상황에 따라 감정의 표현 방식이 다르다.
③ 시대의 상황을 반영한 영화는 관객의 공감을 얻는다.
④ 중립적인 태도 유지가 갈등을 해결하는 데 도움이 된다.
⑤ 선행 장면에 따라서 동일한 시각 정보가 다르게 해석된다.

* seismic: 지진에 의한
① essential procedures during earthquake drills
② advanced technologies for earthquake prediction
③ causes of earthquakes from a geological perspective
④ restorations of the built environment after an earthquake
⑤ considerations for an earthquake­resistant built environment


24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The most innovative teams are those that can restructure themselves in response to unexpected shifts in the environment; they don’t need a strong leader to tell them what to do. Moreover, they tend to form spontaneously; when like­minded people find each other, a group emerges. The improvisational collaboration of the entire group translates moments of individual creativity into group innovation. Allowing the space for this self­organizing emergence to occur is difficult for many managers because the outcome isn’t controlled by the management team’s agenda and is therefore less predictable. Most business executives like to start with the big picture and then work out the details. That’s why so many of the best examples of improvised innovation take place outside of formal organizations. In improvisational innovation, teams start with the details and then work up to the big picture. It’s riskier and less efficient, but when a successful innovation emerges, it’s often very surprising and imaginative.
① The Start of Innovation: A Leader’s Big Picture
② Unpredictable Changes: Challenges to Innovation
③ Conflicting Ideas Lead to the Ultimate Innovation
④ Weakness of Improvisational Teams in Emergencies
⑤ Improvised Innovation Emerges from the Bottom Up




4	영어 영역



25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above shows the percentage of people in six countries who said they spent money on professional training from February 2020 to March 2021. ① China showed the highest percentage of respondents in all three categories: online training/courses (18%), personal business/life coach (7%), and individual course/class (12%). ② In Spain, the number of respondents who said they were trained online was more than four times that of those who said they were trained by personal business/life coaches. ③ The percentages of people who spent money on personal business/life coaches were all the same in Switzerland, Germany, and the United Kingdom. ④ The combined percentage of all three categories in Germany was the same as that in the U.K., but the percentage of people in Germany who spent money on individual courses/classes was higher than that in the U.K.
⑤ Of	the	six	countries,France	showedthesmallestpercentage	both	in	onlinetraining/coursesandpersonalbusiness/life coach.

26. Dorothy Lavinia Brown에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Dorothy Lavinia Brown was the first black female in the American South to become a surgeon. As an infant she was placed in an orphanage. After high school, she won a scholarship to Bennett College, and after graduating there in 1941, she entered Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee, graduating in 1948. Her medical internship was served at New York’s Harlem Hospital but there she encountered gender resistance and was denied residency as a surgeon. She then returned to Meharry and completed her surgical residency in 1954. She later became chief of surgery and educational director of the Riverside­Meharry Clinic in Nashville, as well as an attending surgeon at George W. Hubbard Hospital and a professor of surgery at the Meharry Medical College. In 1966 she became the first African American woman elected to the Tennessee state legislature.
① 미국 남부에서 외과 의사가 된 최초의 흑인 여성이었다.
② 유아일 때 보육원에 맡겨졌다.
③ 고등학교 졸업 후 장학금을 받고 Bennett College에 들어갔다.
④ 뉴욕의 Harlem 병원에서 외과 레지던트 과정을 마쳤다.
⑤ 1966년에 Tennessee 주의회 의원으로 선출되었다.
27. 
Maple Singers에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 30명이 넘는 단원으로 구성되어 있다.
② 모차르트를 포함한 작곡가들의 다양한 곡을 부른다.
③ 입단을 위한 오디션을 실시한다.
④ 일주일에 한 번 리허설을 한다.
⑤ 연회비는 70달러이다.

28. Guided Nature Walks에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 1시간 동안 멈추지 않고 걷는다.
② 매주 일요일 오후에 두 차례 진행된다.
③ 공원 방문자 센터에서 출발한다.
④ 예약 없이 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 그룹별 참여 인원에 제한이 없다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　According to its dictionary definition, an anthem is both a song of loyalty, often to a country, and a piece of ‘sacred music’, definitions that are both applicable in sporting contexts. This genre is dominated, although not exclusively, by football and has produced a number of examples ① where popular songs become synonymous with the club and are enthusiastically adopted by the fans. More than this they are often spontaneous expressions of loyalty and identity and, according to Desmond Morris, have ‘reached the level of something ② approached a local art form’. A strong element of the appeal of such sports songs ③ is that they feature ‘memorable and easily sung choruses in which fans can participate’. This is a vital part of the team’s performance ④ as

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 31.Writing  lyrics  means  shaping  the  meaning  of  something which, if left as instrumental music, would remain undefined; there is a change of the level of expression. That’s one reason why for many songwriters ‘lyric’ seems to be the hardest word. Picture this scene: a songwriter at the piano, or with a guitar, plays with chords and creates an emotion and atmosphere that is  creatively  inspiring.  Our
songwriter invents a melody to go with this mood. Then
comes the moment where words are required, and that means getting specific. This sad­ or happy­sounding chord progression must now direct its general sadness or happiness to a particular human situation.  A  lyric  is  the  place  where the emotional suggestions of pure music are defined as

it makes  the  fans’  presence  more  tangible.  This form of	 	human concerns and events. It’s like a piece

popular culture can be said ⑤ to display pleasure and emotional excess in contrast to the dominant culture which tends to maintain ‘respectable aesthetic distance and control’.
* synonymous: 밀접한 연관을 갖는 ** tangible: 확실한



















30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은?
　How people behave often depends on what others do. If other car drivers or subway users leave for work at 8 a.m., it may be to my ① advantage to leave at 6 a.m., even if that is really too early from my point of view. In equilibrium, flows ② stabilize so that each person makes the best trade­off between their ideal schedule and the congestion they will suffer on their commute. In making such choices, agents seek to ③ differentiate their behavior from that of others. On other occasions, agents have a problem with coordination. They would like to choose to behave the same way as others. For example, if most of my fellow citizens did not pay their parking tickets, there would be (unfortunately) strong pressure for an amnesty for such offenders, which would ④ increase my incentive to pay my parking tickets too. There may be multiple equilibria, so that two otherwise identical societies may ⑤ adopt different behavioral patterns.
* equilibrium: 균형(상태) ** amnesty: 사면

of translation, from one medium into another. The general musical mood is focused by a lyric into a context, a voice, a human drama.
① concrete
② obscure
③ ethical
④ unforeseen
⑤ exaggerated










32.In  the  health  area,  the  concern  with  use  after  “purchase”   is as critical as and even more critical than the concern with the purchase itself. The person who is sold on and goes through disease screening procedures but does not follow through with medical treatment for a diagnosed condition, is as much of a failure as a person who did not avail himself of the screening program to begin with. The obese individual who has been successfully sold on going on a medically prescribed diet but is lured back to his
candy jar and apple pie after one week, is as much of a failure as if he never had been sold on the need to lose and control his weight. The most challenging, most difficult, most perplexing problem is not how to sell people on health­supportive practices, not even how to get them to initiate such practices. We have been fairly successful with these. It is to persuade and help them 	.
① to discover the blind spot
② to stick with new practices
③ to build a sense of security
④ to avoid unnecessary treatment
⑤ to come up with novel solutions




6	영어 영역



3.Like faces, sometimes movement can 	. For example, toys that seem to come alive fascinate children. In my day, one of the popular toys was a piece of finely coiled wire called a “Slinky.” It could appear to walk by stretching and lifting up one end over another down an incline, a bit like an acrobatic caterpillar. The attraction of the Slinky on Christmas Day was the lifelike movement it had as it stepped down the stairs before someone trod on it or twisted the spring and ruined it for good. Toys that
appear to be alive are curiosities because they challenge how we think inanimate objects and living things should behave. Many toys today exploit this principle to great effect, but be warned: not all babies enjoy objects that suddenly seem lifelike. This anxiety probably reflects their confusion over the question, “Is it alive or what?” Once babies decide that something is alive, they are inclined to see its movements as purposeful. [3점]
* incline: 경사면 ** acrobatic: 곡예를 부리는
① fool us into thinking that something has a mind
② help us release and process certain feelings
③ shift our energy and protective mechanisms
④ secretly unlock emotions that words cannot
⑤ create a definite sense of achievement








34. If the nature of a thing is such that when removed from the environment in which it naturally occurs it alters radically, you will not glean an accurate account of it by examining it within laboratory conditions. If you are only accustomed to seeing it operate within such an artificial arena, you may not even recognize it when it is
functioning in its normal context. Indeed, if you ever spot it in that environment you may think it is something else. Similarly, if you believe that leadership only takes the form of heroic men metaphorically charging in on white horses to save the day, you may neglect the many acts which 	. You may fail to see the importance of the grooms who care for the horses, the messengers who bring attention to the crisis or the role played by those cheering from the sidelines. You may miss the fact that without troops supporting them, any claims to leading on the part of these heroes would be rather hollow. [3점]
* glean: 찾아내다
① alter the powers of local authorities
② contribute to their ability to be there
③ compel them to conceal their identity
④ impose their sacrifice and commitment
⑤ prevent them from realizing their potential

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　A group of academics, mainly political scientists, assumed that human rights treaties did not have any effect on the behavior of countries. ① Indeed, these academics, who typically called themselves “realists,” assumed that international law generally did not affect the behavior of states. ② They saw the international arena as a security competition among different states, a zero­sum game in which one state’s gain was another state’s loss. ③ International lawyers and human rights advocates assumed that human rights treaties caused countries to improve their treatment of their citizens. ④ In such conditions, states could gain little by cooperating with each other ─ except in temporary military alliances or security agreements that could fall apart at a moment’s notice. ⑤ International law could play a minimal role or none at all, and was perhaps just an illusion, a sophisticated kind of propaganda ─ a set of rules that would be swept away whenever the balance of power changed.







[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것 을 고르시오.
36.


(A) These stories will make them realise that you are meant to follow your passion. At times they need to be surprised with your small achievements, which could be some additional skills you acquired, or some awards you won in your field of passion.
(B) Discuss this almost twice a week. Then start doing work related to your passion on the side and let them see and experience how happy you are while doing this. Find a way to get your family and friends involved in your passion. The more they see you doing your passion, the more they connect with you emotionally.
(C) Tell them stories of how you are inspired by the passion and how it makes a difference not only to you but also to others. Give examples of how someone living a similar passion started his or her life and today how he or she is living happily.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) Meanwhile, the architectures of sprawl inhibit political activity that requires face­to­face interaction. It is not that sprawl makes political activity impossible, but by privatizing gathering space and dispersing human activity, sprawl makes political gathering less likely.
(B) These are both possible, but evidence suggests that the spatial landscape matters. Sociologists point out that the suburbs have done an efficient job of sorting people into communities where they will be surrounded by people of the same socioeconomic status.
(C) It may be because people in the dispersed city have invested so heavily in private comfort that they feel insulated from the problems of the rest of the world. It may be that sprawl has attracted people who are naturally less interested in engaging with the world, socially or politically. [3점]
* sprawl: 스프롤(무질서하게 뻗어 나간 도시 외곽 지역)
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　A meaningful level of complexity in our history consists of culture: information stored in nerve and brain cells or in human records of various kinds. The species that has developed this capacity the most is, of course, humankind. ( ① ) In terms of total body weight, our species currently makes up about 0.005 per cent of all planetary biomass. ( ② ) If all life combined were only a paint chip, all human beings today would jointly amount to no more than a tiny colony of bacteria sitting on that flake. ( ③ ) Yet through their combined efforts humans have learned to control a considerable portion of the terrestrial biomass, today perhaps as much as between 25 and 40 per cent of it. ( ④ ) In other words, thanks to its culture this tiny colony of microorganisms residing on a paint chip has gained control over a considerable portion of that flake. ( ⑤ ) We also need to study the cultural information that humans have been using for shaping their own lives as well as considerable portions of the rest of nature. [3점]

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Government warnings and stark statistics about mercury­contaminated fish have become so routine that we barely take note. ( ① ) I have to ask: why have these warnings been aimed at getting people to cease eating fish, rather than at getting the industries to stop putting mercury into our environment? ( ② ) Finally in February 2009, near­global consensus was reached: more than 140 countries convened by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) unanimously agreed to create an international mercury treaty. ( ③ ) They also urged immediate action through a voluntary Global Mercury Partnership while the treaty is being  finalized. ( ④ ) But  investments  in eliminating mercury are investments well spent. ( ⑤ ) UNEP estimates that every kilogram of mercury taken out of the environment can lead to up to $12,500 worth of social, environmental, and human health benefits.
* stark: 확실한 ** convene: 소집하다







?
Magicians, having long refined existing tricks, are not much worried about (A)  tricks, but they are very  strict about  (B)  the  methods  of  tricks  as  it damages their industry.

(A) (B)
① copying	········	blending
② copying	········	disclosing
③ criticizing	········	distorting
④ modifying	········	evaluating
⑤ modifying	········	underestimating




8	영어 영역


[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
	
(C)
(D)













41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Efforts to Develop Ideal Content for Online Media
② Cable News Networks: Places for Public Discourse
③ Techniques of Utilizing Media Content for Political Data
④ Analysis of Quality Competition Among Media Platforms
⑤ Flood of Media Information: Barriers to Balanced Perspectives


42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Green 선생님은 갑자기 나타난 젊은이를 보고 놀랐다.
② Jacob은 쉬는 시간을 포기하고 Green 선생님을 보러 왔다.
③ Jacob은 가정 형편 때문에 다른 주로 이사했다.
④ Jacob은 1학년 내내 수업에 열심히 참여했다.
⑤ Jacob은 자신이 좋아하는 사탕을 찾기 시작했다.






2022학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 전기 절약의 필요성을 강조하려고
② 엘리베이터 안전 수칙을 알려 주려고
③ 전문 기술자 초청 강연을 공지하려고
④ 컴퓨터 데이터 복원 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 전기 점검 관련 유의 사항을 안내하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 설문 방식을 다양화해야 응답자의 수를 늘릴 수 있다.
② 설문 문항은 가능한 한 쉽고 간결하게 제작해야 한다.
③ 온라인 설문은 응답을 수집하는 가장 편리한 방식이다.
④ 응답자의 익명을 보장해야 솔직한 의견을 얻을 수 있다.
⑤ 설문 참여를 높이려면 응답자에게 보상을 제공해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 영화감독 - 만화가	② 촬영 감독 - 영화배우
③ 방송 진행자 - 소설가	④ 출판사 직원 - 삽화가
⑤ 신문 기자 - 시나리오 작가

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르 시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 설거지하기	② 와인 주문하기
③ 친환경 비누 만들기	④ 주방 세제 사 오기
⑤ 웹 사이트 링크 보내기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $30	② $40	③ $45	④ $55	⑤ $60


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 야외 좌석을 원하지 않는 이유를 고르시 오. [3점]
① 대화하기에 너무 시끄러워서
② 햇빛이 너무 강해 눈이 부셔서
③ 미세 먼지 때문에 공기 질이 나빠서
④ 기온이 낮아 감기에 걸릴까 걱정되어서
⑤ 야외에서 보는 전망이 마음에 들지 않아서

8. 대화를 듣고, Galland perfume workshop에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 연령	② 사용 언어	③ 시간
④ 예약 방법	⑤ 장소

9. Flashlight Tour에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 미술관 폐장 후에 시작된다.
② 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 성인 입장료는 10달러이다.
④ 손전등이 기념품으로 제공된다.
⑤ 참가 인원에 제한이 있다.

10.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 휴대용 가습기를 고르시오.
Best Portable Humidifiers

①
②
③
④
⑤

1.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Thank you very much for picking me up.
② I’ll finish the laundry as soon as possible.
③ I’m sorry. I won’t be late for school again.
④ I’m not sure. I’ll call you when I’m finished.
⑤ Never mind. I’ll complete the project tomorrow.

12.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m very satisfied. You should buy one.
② Right. The air quality today is not that bad.
③ Great. I want to buy an air purifier like yours.
④ Put it here near the window. It’s the best place.
⑤ Okay. Let’s open the window and get some fresh air.




2	영어 영역


13.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① No. We had no choice but to send it to you.
② Sorry. There are no other colors available now.
③ Yes. I’d like to get a refund for the yellow one.
④ Okay. You can send the large size one back to us.
⑤ Sure. We’ll send you a large size one immediately.


14.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Of course. I don’t need it any more.
② Don’t worry. You’ll get used to it soon.
③ Exactly! You need to buy a smartphone.
④ Right. I checked my text before sending it.
⑤ No way. Smartphones are not that expensive.


15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Emily가  Randy에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Emily:  	
① Do you know where the lost and found is?
② Can you tell me where you bought your watch?
③ Didn’t you take off your watch in the bathroom?
④ Do you know how to wash your hands properly?
⑤ Didn’t you visit the shop to have your watch fixed?


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① steps in planning an efficient smart city
② pros and cons of developing smart cities
③ problems of smart cities and why they arise
④ successful smart cities and how they operate
⑤ interconnectedness of smart cities around the world


17.언급된 도시가 아닌 것은?
① Singapore	② San Diego	③ London
④ Dubai	⑤ New York




18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 제품의 모든 세부 사항과 견본을  요청하려고
② 신제품의 가격 인상 요인에 대해  설명하려고
③ 수출할 제품에 대한 전수 검사를  의뢰하려고
④ 웹 사이트에 게시한 정보의 수정을 촉구하려고
⑤ 제조업체에 품질 개선을 위한 회의를 제안하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Finally, it came to my turn. I was supposed to walk backward off the cliff. Just looking down the cliff made my legs begin to shake. I knew there was a safety rope around me in case I should black out. I had an intellectual understanding of the whole situation and an intellectual sense of security. Nevertheless, my hair stood on end and I shivered all over. That first step off the cliff was the most difficult moment, but I made it ? as did others. I arrived safely at the bottom, overjoyed by the success of meeting the challenge. I felt as though I was walking on air.
① relaxed → nervous	② angry → ashamed
③ terrified → delighted	④ envious → sympathetic
⑤ disappointed → hopeful

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Conflicts between the goals of science and the need to protect the rights and welfare of human research participants result in the central ethical tension of clinical research. The statement “Bad science is bad ethics” is true. Putting humans at risk if the study design does not permit a reasonable expectation of valid findings is never ethical. Even a study that presents no risk presents at least an inconvenience to participants and is in that sense disrespectful. The statement “Good science is good ethics,” however, is false. Study design may be scientifically valid, yet the risk of harming human participants is too great to accept. Although achieving the appropriate scientific ends is always the necessary goal of a study, protection of the rights and welfare of human participants must override scientific efficiency.
① 참가자에게 임상 연구 결과를 투명하게 공개해야  한다.
② 임상 연구 과정에서 진행자의 편견이 배제되어야  한다.
③ 인간을 대상으로 하는 다양한 임상 연구를 시도해야 한다.
④ 임상 연구 설계 시 연구 목적을 구체적으로 설정해야 한다.
⑤ 임상 연구에서 참가자의 권리와 복지 보호가 우선되어야 한다.




영어 영역	3


21.밑줄 친 carries the stamp of this age가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Thomas Edison’s name is synonymous with invention, and his most famous invention, the electric light bulb, is a familiar symbol for that flash of inspired genius traditionally associated with the inventive act. Besides being the exemplar of the “bright idea,” however, Edison’s electric light is worthy of study for other reasons. The technical and economic importance of the light and of the electrical system that surrounded it matches that of any other invention we could name, at least from the last two hundred years. The introduction and spread of electric light and power was one of the key steps in the transformation of the world from an industrial age, characterized by iron and coal and steam, to a post?industrial one, in which electricity was joined by petroleum, light metals and alloys, and internal combustion engines to give the twentieth century its distinctive form and character. Our own time still largely carries the stamp of this age, however dazzled we may be by the electronic, computerized, and media wonders of the twenty?first century.
* alloy: 합금
① combines creative ideas from various disciplines
② strives to overcome limitations of the industrial age
③ is a theoretical background for academic exploration
④ is under the influence of earlier electrical innovations
⑤ is dependent on resources reserved for future generations

2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Just imagine that we have invented special glasses that give us the power to see the odorous world the way that other organisms perceive it. Put your pair on and walk outside for just a moment. As the bright sunlight hits our eyes, we would encounter a world far different from what we would normally expect. The air is full of molecules carried by breezes. Chemical signals would flood our eyes just as surely as sounds overwhelm our ears at a cocktail party. Stare at any plant and you would see compounds being released into the air from leaves, bark, and roots. A squirrel in a tree exudes carbon dioxide and other compounds with each breath. Glance along its brown body and notice that specific points (scent glands) appear to be slowly releasing chemical signals. If we could translate these signals into language, we would see phrases, sentences, statements, songs, and other messages waiting to be intercepted and interpreted.
* exude: 발산하다 ** gland: (분비)샘
① 인간이 보지 못하는 것을 볼 수 있는 유기체가 매우 많다.
② 세상은 인간이 지각하지 못하는 화학 신호로 가득 차 있다.
③ 동물과 식물의 감각 기관은 외부 자극에 일정하게  반응한다.
④ 동물과 식물은 화학 물질의 발산을 통해 스스로를  보호한다.
⑤ 시각적 인식이 다른 모든 감각에 의한 인식보다 더 우선한다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Skills?based approaches to teaching critical thinking now have a long history and literature, but what has become clear through more than 25 years of work on critical thinking theory and pedagogy is that teaching students a set of thinking skills does not seem to be enough. Students may learn to write an adequate article critique in one class, but fail to use those skills in another. They may learn how to evaluate research methodology in other students’ research designs, but completely miss the flaws in their own. They may learn to recognize thinking biases in the classroom, but still use badly flawed reasoning in their own decision making. Too often students think our courses are either about memorizing a great deal of material, or about learning the rules for and playing one more idiosyncratic academic game. Students regularly fail to understand what we are trying to teach them or they fail to transfer and generalize thinking skills across contexts and classes.
* pedagogy: 교수법 ** idiosyncratic: 특유한
① importance of critical thinking in school learning
② limitations of teaching thinking skills to students
③ impacts of thinking biases on academic performance
④ application of various teaching methods in classrooms
⑤ necessity of evaluating students’ critical thinking skills




24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　As much as we like to think of ourselves as being different and special, humans are a part of Earth’s biosphere, created within and by it. Ultimately, it is the living, breathing elements of this world that we need more than inanimate supplies, such as coal, gas, or bauxite ore. We can live without cars or beer cans, but we cannot without food and oxygen. As nations around the globe try to band together to attack the problems of greenhouse gas emissions and the shrinking availability of fresh drinking water, in all corners of the world thousands of species quietly go extinct.
E. O. Wilson, the renowned Harvard biologist, recently presented the problem our species faces in a succinct law: “If you save the living environment, the biodiversity that we have left, you will also automatically save the physical environment, too. But if you only save the physical environment, you will ultimately lose both.”
* biosphere: 생물권 ** ore: 광석 *** succinct: 간결한
① Save Biodiversity to Save the Earth
② Invasive Alien Species Threaten Biodiversity
③ Potentiality and Utilization of Renewable Energy
④ Tackling Climate Change Has a Long Way to Go
⑤ Worldwide Efforts to Protect Endangered Species




4	영어 영역


25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above shows the CO2 emissions from cars versus ships in Europe in 2019. ① Among the eight countries, the CO2 emissions from ships were larger than those from cars except for Belgium. ② The Netherlands had the largest CO2 emissions from both cars and ships, whereas Sweden had the smallest CO2 emissions from both. ③ The CO2 emissions from ships were larger in Spain than in the United Kingdom, but the CO2 emissions from cars were larger in the United Kingdom than in Spain. ④ Germany’s CO2 emissions from ships were more than twice those of Sweden. ⑤ The gap between the CO2 emissions from cars and ships was the largest in the Netherlands and the smallest in Italy and France.





26. Josef Sudek에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Josef Sudek was born in the Czech Republic. Originally a bookbinder, Sudek was badly injured during World War I, resulting in the loss of his right arm. After the injury, he spent three years in various hospitals, and began to take photographs out of boredom. In 1922, he enrolled at the State School of Graphic Arts in Prague, where he studied photography for two years. His army disability pension allowed him to make art without worrying about an income. He photographed many night?scapes of Prague and the wooded landscapes of Bohemia. Sudek didn’t let his disability get in the way and, despite having only one arm, he used very heavy and bulky equipment. Often known as the ‘Poet of Prague,’ Sudek never married, and was a shy and retiring person. He never appeared at his exhibition openings. He died on 15 September 1976, when he was 80 years old.
① 제1차 세계 대전 중 심한 부상으로 오른팔을 잃었다.
② Prague에 있는 학교에서 2년 동안 사진술을 공부했다.
③ 연금을 받아서 수입 걱정 없이 예술 창작을 할 수 있었다.
④ 매우 무겁고 부피가 큰 장비를 사용했다.
⑤ 자신의 전시회 개막식에 항상 참석했다.
27. 
Dogs at the Park에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 개 패션쇼가 열릴 예정이다.
② 일요일에 네 시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 공격성이 있는 개는 데려올 수 없다.
④ 사전 등록 없이 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 판매자는 3월 25일까지 부스를 신청해야 한다.

28.2022  Spring  Art  Contest  & Exhibition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 12세 이하라면 누구나 참가할 수 있다.
② 대회 부문에서 사진은 제외된다.
③ 1인당 3개까지 출품작을 제출할 수 있다.
④ 전시회는 두 달 동안 열린다.
⑤ 전시 중 출품작의 손상은 주최측이 책임진다.




영어 영역	5


29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　We don’t know what ancient Greek music sounded like, because there are no examples of it in written or notated form, nor ① has it survived in oral tradition. Much of it was probably improvised anyway, within certain rules and conventions. So we are forced largely to guess at its basis from the accounts of writers such as Plato and Aristotle, who were generally more concerned with writing about music as a philosophical and ethical exercise ② as with providing a technical primer on its practice. It seems Greek music was predominantly a vocal form, ③ consisting of sung verse accompanied by instruments such as the lyre or the plucked kithara (the root of ‘guitar’). In fact, Plato considered music in which the lyre and flute played alone and not as the accompaniment of dance or song ④ to be

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 31.In  the  Indian  language  of  pali,  mett? means  benevolence, kindness  or tenderness.  It is one of the  most  important
ideas in Buddhism. Buddhism recommends a daily ritual meditation (known as mett? bh?van?) to  foster  this  attitude. The meditation begins with a call to think carefully every morning of an individual with whom one tends to get irritated or to whom one feels aggressive or cold and ? in place of one’s normal hostile impulses ? to rehearse kindly messages like ‘I hope you will find peace’ or ‘I wish you to be free from suffering’. This practice can be extended outwards ultimately to include pretty much everyone on Earth. The background assumption is that, with the right stimulus, our feelings towards people are not fixed and unalterable, but open to deliberate change and improvement.

‘exceedingly coarse and tasteless’. The melodies seem to	 	is a learnable skill, and we need to direct it

have had a very limited pitch range, since the instruments
⑤ generally span only an octave, from one E (as we’d now define it) to the next.
* primer: 입문서 ** lyre: 수금(竪琴) *** coarse: 조잡한












30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은?
　Just as there’s a tendency to glorify technological progress, there’s a countertendency to expect the worst of every new tool or machine. In Plato’s Phaedrus, Socrates bemoaned the ① development of writing. He feared that, as people came to rely on the written word as a ② substitute for the knowledge they used to carry inside their heads, they would, in the words of one of the dialogue’s characters, “cease to exercise their memory and become forgetful.” And because they would be able to “③ receive a quantity of information without proper instruction,” they would “be thought very knowledgeable when they are for the most part

as much towards those we are tempted to dismiss and detest as to those we love.
① Creativity	② Relaxation
③ Compassion	④ Justification
⑤ Empowerment







32.When  trying  to  understand  the  role  of  the  sun  in  ancient journeys, the sources become fewer and the journeys less well known. Herodotus writes about an exploratory voyage commissioned by the ancient Egyptian King Necho II in about 600 BC. Necho II reportedly ordered a Phoenician expedition to sail clockwise around Africa, starting at the Red Sea and returning to the mouth of the Nile. They were gone for three years. Herodotus writes that the Phoenicians, upon returning from their heroic expedition, reported that after sailing south and then turning west, they found the sun was on their right, the opposite direction to where they were used to seeing it or expecting it to be. Contemporary astronomical science was simply not strong enough to fabricate such an accurate, fundamental and yet prosaic detail of where the sun would be after sailing past the equator and into the southern hemisphere. It is this that leads many of today’s historians to conclude that the journey

quite ignorant.”  They would  be “filled with the conceit of	 	. [3점]
wisdom instead of real wisdom.” Socrates wasn’t ④ right ─


the new technology did often have the effects he feared ─ but he was shortsighted. He couldn’t ⑤ foresee the many ways that writing and reading would serve to spread information, spark fresh ideas, and expand human knowledge (if not wisdom).
* bemoan: 한탄하다 ** conceit: 자만심

* fabricate: 꾸며 내다, 만들어 내다 ** prosaic: 평범한
① must have taken place
② was not reported at all
③ was not worth the time
④ should have been planned better
⑤ could be stopped at any moment




6	영어 영역


3.Gordon Allport  argued that history records  many individuals who were not content with an existence that offered them little variety, a lack of psychic tension, and minimal challenge. Allport considers it normal to be pulled forward by a vision of the future that awakened within persons their drive to 	. He suggests that people possess a need to invent motives and purposes that would consume their inner energies. Similarly, Erich Fromm proposed a need on the part of humans to rise above the roles of passive creatures in an accidental if not random world. To him, humans are driven to transcend the state of merely having been created; instead, humans seek to become the creators, the active shapers of their own destiny. Rising above the passive and accidental nature of existence, humans generate their own purposes and thereby provide themselves with a true basis of freedom. [3점]
* transcend: 초월하다
① alter the course of their lives
② possess more than other people
③ suppress their negative emotions
④ sacrifice themselves for noble causes
⑤ show admiration for supernatural power






34. The history of perspective in Western painting matters because of what it reveals for the art of living. Just as most artists conform to the stylistic conventions of the era into which they are born, we similarly conform to prevailing social conventions about how to live. These unwritten rules typically include getting married and having children, owning your own home and having a mortgage, having a regular job and commuting to work, and flying abroad for holidays. For some people these are realities, for others they remain aspirations. It is common to 	. At this point in Western history, they are amongst the dominant conventions that most of us have accepted with little questioning, much as Vermeer and other Dutch baroque painters of the seventeenth century accepted linear perspective without question. It is difficult to see beyond the limitations of the culture that has shaped our ways of looking at the world and at ourselves. We are trapped in the perspective of our own time. [3점]
* mortgage: 담보 대출
① distinguish them from ideas and wishes
② feel social pressure to comply with them
③ apply them to create inspirational artworks
④ ignore them on account of their complexity
⑤ have an objection to being controlled by them

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　When approaching practical music making for the first time in the classroom, it is a good idea to avoid using instruments altogether. ① This will allow an inexperienced teacher to focus on the development of fundamental musical behaviour through listening, performing and composing; and allow the children to focus on the more controllable sound sources i.e. voices and body percussion (clapping, clicking, stamping etc).
② Music starts with these both developmentally and historically: the most expressive and immediate musical instrument is the human voice. ③ The sound quality of an instrument is a direct result of the quality of the materials, design, and making. ④ Body movements are not only an instinctive response to music but also instigate music making.
⑤ Activities which develop many of the coordination skills, aural sensitivity, responses to visual cues and symbols, and the musical understanding necessary to play an instrument can all be established without instruments.
* instigate: 부추기다 ** coordination: 조정


[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) The relief from no longer feeling “fear or hatred” toward the blamer spontaneously triggers a tremendous rush of gratitude and ? miraculously ? the person’s quiet rage turns into forgiveness and, beyond that, a willingness to work toward solutions.
(B) Suddenly and unexpectedly, however, the blamer knows just how sad, angry, scared, or lonely the defender feels and spontaneously turns into an ally. When the defender feels understood by the blamer and that they are on the same side, there’s nothing to defend against. The defender’s wall, and with it his unspoken rage and frustration, disappears.
(C) And what about the person who’s on the defensive? Initially, this human punching bag is frustrated because no matter what he or she is trying to mirror outward the ignorant blamer is blind to it. As a result, the person who’s under attack is usually in a state of quiet, barely controlled rage.
* rant: 폭언하다 ** spontaneously: 자연스럽게
① (A) ­ (C) ­ (B)	② (B) ­ (A) ­ (C)
③ (B) ­ (C) ­ (A)	④ (C) ­ (A) ­ (B)
⑤ (C) ­ (B) ­ (A)




영어 영역	7

37.	39.
	

(A) “Cloud movement” becomes differentiated from the kind of movement that makes things alive, because the clouds move only if they are “pushed” by the wind, and what can’t move without a push from the outside is not alive.
(B) The cloud may still be thought of as alive, but it is no longer terrifying. Repression and neutralization through metaphor are possible strategies, but there is another. Faced with the moving clouds, the child can theorize about their movement in such a way that the clouds cease to be alive.
(C) Children develop theoretical constructs that separate the motion of clouds from the motion of people and animals so that eventually the fear of living clouds disappears. If things seem uncomfortably on the border between the alive and the not?alive, use logic to redefine the boundaries so that things fall more comfortably into place. If it scares you, make a theory. [3점]
* fleecy: 털이 많은 ** repression: 억제
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Carole Ames, dean of the college of education at Michigan State University, points out that it isn’t “quantitative changes in behavior” (such as requiring students to spend more hours in front of books or worksheets) that help children to learn better. ( ① ) Rather, it’s “qualitative changes in the ways students view themselves in relation to the task, engage in the process of learning, and then respond to the learning activities and situation.” ( ② ) In turn, these attitudes and responses on the part of students emerge from the way teachers think about learning and, as a result, the ways they’ve organized their classrooms. ( ③ ) But that’s unlikely to have a positive effect on the critical variables that Ames identifies. ( ④ ) Perhaps it makes sense to see education as being less about how much the teacher covers and more about what the students can be helped to discover. ( ⑤ ) More time won’t do a thing to bring about that shift. [3점]

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Many of the ritualized displays performed by animals look so bizarre to us that we wonder how they came about. ( ① ) Most of the various forms of signaling that are used by different species of animals have not arisen afresh in each separate species. ( ② ) As one species evolves into another, particular forms of signaling may be passed on, owing to the effects of both genes and learning or experience. ( ③ ) Some signals have significance across many species, and so remain much the same over generations and in a number of species. ( ④ ) If we examine closely related species,  we can often see slight variations in a particular display and we can piece together an explanation for the spread of the display across species. ( ⑤ ) Some very elaborate displays may have begun as simpler versions of the same behavioral pattern that became more elaborate as they developed and were passed on from generation to generation.
* bizarre: 기이한





?
High pathogen density can contribute to the (A) of languages and religions by (B) people’s interactions with their neighboring groups, as was shown in the regions around the equator.

(A) (B)
① diversification	·····	discouraging
② extinction	·····	delaying
③ extinction	·····	expanding
④ unification	·····	discouraging
⑤ diversification	·····	expanding




8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
　Later on, Amit told his idea to his wife. “That’s a good idea!” she said in an excited voice. Amit’s wife handed over her jewelry to (c) him. “Please sell it and buy a buffalo,” she said. Amit was very happy to hear these words from his wife. On the other hand, Kaanan’s wife wasn’t happy with the idea. “We don’t have anything left with us except jewelry. What if the buffalo dies? All our money spent will go to waste. And my jewelry....” said Kaanan’s wife.
(D)











41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Plant Growth Is Up to Soil Content
② Plants Do Behave and Have Intelligence
③ Plants Know the Secret of Solar Signals
④ What Plants and Animals Need for Survival
⑤ Benefits and Challenges of Living in Nature


42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e)  중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과  다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Amit은 우유를 판 돈으로 물소의 수를 늘릴 계획이었다.
② Kaanan은 아내의 말을 진지하게 받아들였다.
③ Kaanan의 아내는 물소를 사려는 계획이 마음에 들지 않았다.
④ 처음에 Amit은 고객을 확보하는 데 어려움이 없었다.
⑤ Amit은 점점 더 많은 돈을 벌어 성공한 사업가가 되었다.


	


2023학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 도서관의 변경된 운영 시간을 안내하려고
② 독후감 쓰기 대회의 일정을 공지하려고
③ 책갈피 디자인 대회 참가를 독려하려고
④ 기한 내 도서 반납을 촉구하려고
⑤ 전자책 이용 방법을 설명하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사과를 먹으면 장운동이 원활해진다.
② 사과 껍질은 피부 상태 개선에 도움이 된다.
③ 충분한 수면은 건강한 피부 유지에 필수적이다.
④ 사과를 먹기 전에 껍질을 깨끗이 씻어야 한다.
⑤ 주기적인 수분 섭취는 피부 노화를 늦춘다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 평론가 － 영화감독	② 심판 － 수영 선수
③ 작가 － 수영 코치	④ 서점 주인 － 유치원 교사
⑤ 잡지사 편집장 － 광고주

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음식 재료 주문하기	② 와인 잔 포장하기
③ 추가 메뉴 선정하기	④ 초대 문자 메시지 보내기
⑤ 노래 목록 확인하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $55	② $63	③ $70	④ $81	⑤ $90




7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 K-Trend Festival에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 영화관에서 일해야 해서
② 유학 설명회에 참석해야 해서
③ 경제학 시험공부를 해야 해서
④ 태권도 시합에 출전해야 해서
⑤ 동생을 공항에 데려다줘야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, 졸업 사진 촬영에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜	② 장소	③ 복장
④ 참여 학생 수	⑤ 소요 시간

9. Greenville  Houseplant  Expo에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 3일 동안 진행될 것이다.
② 식물 관리 방법에 관한 강의가 매일 있을 것이다.
③ 희귀종을 포함한 다양한 식물을 구입할 수 있다.
④ 티켓 구입은 온라인으로만 가능하다.
⑤ 에메랄드 컨벤션 센터에서 열릴 것이다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 첼로 케이스를 고르시오.
Hard Cello Cases


①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Never mind. I’m selling my old helmet.
② All right. I’ll buy a bigger one that fits you.
③ No way. You should not ride a bicycle at night.
④ Great. I think it matches your bicycle perfectly.
⑤ No. We don’t have to worry about the tight schedule.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. Let’s go and look at his career options together.
② Don’t worry. There’s no admission fee for the fair.
③ Too bad. The career fair doesn’t suit my purpose.
④ Why not? He can join the firm as a freelancer.
⑤ Awesome! Good luck with your new career.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Not really. It’s better to speak in simple sentences.
② Yes. Try to memorize words by learning the root words.
③ That’s right. I’m glad you’ve studied the proper examples.
④ Exactly. That way you can use the proper words in context.
⑤ I don’t think so. Always use an Italian-to-Italian dictionary.



14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① I had the photos from our trip printed out yesterday.
② The problem is that I already put out the campfire.
③ I gladly accept his invitation to the fishing camp.
④ Then I’ll ask him to come with me on this trip.
⑤ Remember not to set up your tent near a river.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Katie가 Jacob에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Katie:   	
① You should check how many nursing homes there are.
② Why don’t you reuse the activity you prepared last time?
③ How about preparing multiple activities for your next visit?
④ You need to gain more practical knowledge about nursing.
⑤ You’d better speak to the residents of the neighborhood.


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how metals advanced human civilization
② how techniques applied to metals improved
③ where most precious metals originated from
④ why metals were used in the fashion industry
⑤ why ancient civilizations competed for metals



17. 언급된 금속이 아닌 것은?
① gold	② silver	③ iron
④ aluminum	⑤ nickel





18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

To whom it may concern,
My name is Michael Brown. I have been a bird-watcher since childhood. I have always enjoyed watching birds in my yard and identifying them by sight and sound. Yesterday, I happened to read an article about your club. I was surprised and excited to find out about a community of passionate bird-watchers who travel annually to go birding. I would love to join your club, but your website appears to be under construction. I could not find any information except for this contact email address. I would like to know how to sign up for the club. I look forward to your reply.
Sincerely, Michael Brown
① 조류 관찰 클럽에 가입하는 방법을 문의하려고
② 조류 관찰 시 주의해야 할 사항을 전달하려고
③ 조류 관찰 협회의 새로운 규정을 확인하려고
④ 조류 관찰과 관련된 웹 사이트를 소개하려고
⑤ 조류 관찰 시 필요한 장비를 알아보려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jamie의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Putting all of her energy into her last steps of the running race, Jamie crossed the finish line. To her disappointment, she had failed to beat her personal best time, again. Jamie had pushed herself for months to finally break her record, but it  was all for nothing. Recognizing how she felt about her  failure, Ken, her teammate, approached her and said, “Jamie, even though you didn’t set a personal best time today, your performances have improved dramatically. Your running skills have progressed so much! You’ll definitely break your personal best time in the next race!” After hearing his comments, she felt confident about herself. Jamie, now motivated to keep pushing for her goal, replied with a smile. “You’re right! Next race, I’ll beat my best time for sure!”
① indifferent → regretful	② pleased  → bored
③ frustrated	→ encouraged	④ nervous → fearful
⑤ calm	→ excited
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　At every step in our journey through life we encounter junctions with many different pathways leading into the distance. Each choice involves uncertainty about which path will get you to your destination. Trusting our intuition to make the choice often ends up with us making a suboptimal choice. Turning the uncertainty into numbers has proved a potent way of analyzing the paths and finding the shortcut to your destination. The mathematical theory of probability hasn’t eliminated risk, but it allows us to manage that risk more effectively. The strategy is to analyze all the possible scenarios that the future holds and then to see what proportion of them lead to success or failure. This gives you a much better map of the future on which to base your decisions about which path to choose.
* junction: 분기점 ** suboptimal: 차선의
① 성공적인 삶을 위해 미래에 대한 구체적인 계획을 세워야 한다.
② 중요한 결정을 내릴 때에는 자신의 직관에 따라 판단해야 한다.
③ 더 나은 선택을 위해 성공 가능성을 확률적으로 분석해야 한다.
④ 빠른 목표 달성을 위해 지름길로 가고자 할 때 신중해야 한다.
⑤ 인생의 여정에서 선택에 따른 결과를 스스로 책임져야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 make oneself public to oneself 가 다음 글에서 의미 하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Coming of age in the 18th and 19th centuries, the personal diary became a centerpiece in the construction of a modern subjectivity, at the heart of which is the application of reason and critique to the understanding of world and self, which allowed the creation of a new kind of knowledge. Diaries were central media through which enlightened and free subjects could be constructed. They provided a space where one could write daily about her whereabouts, feelings, and thoughts.  Over time and with rereading, disparate entries, events, and happenstances could be rendered into insights and narratives about the self, and allowed for the formation of subjectivity. It is in that context that the idea of “the self [as] both made and explored with words” emerges. Diaries were personal and private; one would write for oneself, or, in Habermas’s formulation, one would make oneself public to oneself. By making the self public in a private sphere, the self also became an object for self-inspection and self-critique.
* disparate: 이질적인 ** render: 만들다
① use writing as a means of reflecting on oneself
② build one’s identity by reading others’ diaries
③ exchange feedback in the process of writing
④ create an alternate ego to present to others
⑤ develop topics for writing about selfhood


22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Urban delivery vehicles can be adapted to better suit the density of urban distribution, which often involves smaller vehicles such as vans, including bicycles. The latter have the potential to become a preferred ‘last-mile’ vehicle, particularly in high-density and congested areas. In locations where  bicycle use is high, such as the Netherlands, delivery bicycles are also used to carry personal cargo (e.g. groceries). Due to their low acquisition and maintenance costs, cargo bicycles convey much potential in developed and developing countries alike, such as the becak (a three-wheeled bicycle) in Indonesia. Services using electrically assisted delivery tricycles have  been successfully implemented in France and are gradually being adopted across Europe for services as varied as parcel and catering deliveries. Using bicycles as cargo vehicles is particularly encouraged when combined with policies that restrict motor vehicle access to specific areas of a city, such as downtown or commercial districts, or with the extension of dedicated bike lanes.
① 도시에서 자전거는 효율적인 배송 수단으로 사용될 수 있다.
② 자전거는 출퇴근 시간을 줄이기 위한 대안으로 선호되고 있다.
③ 자전거는 배송 수단으로의 경제적 장단점을 모두 가질 수 있다.
④ 수요자의 요구에 부합하는 다양한 용도의 자전거가 개발되고 있다.
⑤ 세계 각국에서는 전기 자전거 사용을 장려하는 정책을 추진하고 있다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　An important advantage of disclosure, as opposed to more aggressive forms of regulation, is its flexibility and respect for the operation of free markets. Regulatory mandates are blunt swords; they tend to neglect diversity and may have serious unintended adverse effects. For example, energy efficiency requirements for appliances may produce goods that work less well or that have characteristics that consumers do not want. Information provision, by contrast, respects freedom  of  choice. If automobile manufacturers are required to measure and publicize the safety characteristics of cars, potential car purchasers can trade safety concerns against other attributes, such as price and styling. If restaurant customers are informed of the calories in their meals, those who want to lose weight can make use of the information, leaving those who are unconcerned about calories unaffected. Disclosure does not interfere with, and should even promote, the autonomy (and quality) of individual decision-making.
* mandate: 명령 ** adverse: 거스르는 *** autonomy: 자율성
① steps to make public information accessible to customers
② benefits of publicizing information to ensure free choices
③ strategies for companies to increase profits in a free market
④ necessities of identifying and analyzing current industry trends
⑤ effects of diversified markets on reasonable customer choices



24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Different parts of the brain’s visual system get information on a need-to-know basis. Cells that help your hand muscles reach out to an object need to know the size and  location of  the object, but they don’t need to know about color. They need to know a little about shape, but not in great detail. Cells that help you recognize people’s faces need to be extremely sensitive to details of shape, but they can pay less attention to location. It is natural to assume that anyone who sees an object sees everything about it ― the shape, color, location, and movement. However, one part of your brain sees its shape, another sees color, another detects location, and another perceives movement. Consequently, after localized brain damage, it is possible to see certain aspects of an object and  not others. Centuries ago, people found it difficult to imagine how someone could see an object without seeing what color it is. Even today, you might find it surprising to learn about people who see an object without seeing where it is, or see it without seeing whether it is moving.
① Visual Systems Never Betray Our Trust!
② Secret Missions of Color-Sensitive Brain Cells
③ Blind Spots: What Is Still Unknown About the Brain
④ Why Brain Cells Exemplify Nature’s Recovery Process
⑤ Separate and Independent: Brain Cells’ Visual Perceptions


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	

25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?	27. 다음 Renovation Notice의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
















　The above graph shows the percentages of Americans’ preferred type of place to live by age group, based on a 2020 survey. ① In each of the three age groups, Town/Rural Area was the most preferred type of place to live. ② In the 18-34 year-olds group, the percentage of those who preferred Big/Small City was higher than that of those who preferred Suburb of Big/Small City. ③ In the 35-54 year-olds group, the percentage of those who preferred Suburb of Big/Small City exceeded that of those who preferred Big/Small City. ④ In the 55 year-olds and older group, the percentage of those who chose Big/Small City among the three preferred types of place to live was the lowest. ⑤ Each percentage of the three preferred types of place to live was higher than 20% across the three age groups.


26. Niklas Luhmann에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Niklas Luhmann, a renowned sociologist of the twentieth century, was born in L?neburg, Germany in 1927. After World War II, he studied law at the University of Freiburg until 1949. Early in his career, he worked for the State of Lower Saxony, where he was in charge of educational reform. In 1960?1961, Luhmann had the chance to study sociology at Harvard University, where he was influenced by Talcott  Parsons, one  of the most famous social system theorists. Later, Luhmann developed his own social system theory. In 1968, he became a professor of sociology at the University of Bielefeld. He researched a variety of subjects, including mass media  and law. Although his books are known to be difficult to translate, they have in fact been widely translated into other languages.
① 제2차 세계 대전 이후에 법을 공부했다.
② State of Lower Saxony에서 교육 개혁을 담당했다.
③ Harvard University에 있을 때 Talcott Parsons의 영향을 받았다.
④ 다양한 주제에 관해 연구했다.
⑤ 그의 책은 번역하기가 쉽다고 알려져 있다.

Renovation Notice
　At the Natural Jade Resort, we are continually improving our facilities to better serve our guests. Therefore, we will be renovating some areas of the resort, according to the schedule below.
Renovation Period: November 21 to December 18, 2022
?Renovations will take place every day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Areas to be Closed: Gym and indoor swimming pool
Further Information
?All outdoor leisure activities will be available as usual.
?Guests will receive a 15% discount for all meals in the restaurant.
?Guests may use the tennis courts for free.
　We will take all possible measures to minimize noise and any other inconvenience. We sincerely appreciate your understanding.

① 보수 공사는 2022년 11월 21일에 시작된다.
② 보수 공사는 주말에만 진행될 것이다.
③ 체육관과 실내 수영장은 폐쇄될 것이다.
④ 모든 야외 레저 활동은 평소와 같이 가능할 것이다.
⑤ 손님은 무료로 테니스장을 이용할 수 있다.

28. 2022 Valestown Recycles Poster Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

2022 Valestown Recycles Poster Contest
　Join this year’s Valestown Recycles Poster Contest and show off your artistic talent!
Guidelines
Participation is only for high school students in Valestown.
 Participants should use the theme of “Recycling for the
Future.”
Submission Format
File type: PDF only
Maximum file size: 40MB
Judging Criteria
Use of theme	 Creativity	Artistic skill
Details
Submissions are limited to one poster per person.
Submissions should be uploaded to the website by 6 p.m.,
December 19.
Winners will be announced on the website on December 28.
For more information, please visit www.vtco.org.

① Valestown의 모든 학생들이 참여할 수 있다.
② 참가자는 포스터의 주제 선정에 제약을 받지 않는다.
③ 출품할 파일 양식은 자유롭게 선택 가능하다.
④ 심사 기준에 창의성이 포함된다.
⑤ 1인당 출품할 수 있는 포스터의 수에는 제한이 없다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Trends constantly suggest new opportunities for individuals to restage themselves, representing occasions for change. To understand how trends can ultimately give individuals power and freedom, one must first discuss fashion’s importance as a basis for change. The most common explanation offered by  my informants as to why fashion is so appealing is ① that it constitutes a kind of theatrical costumery. Clothes are part of how people present ② them to the world, and fashion locates them in the present, relative to what is happening in society  and to fashion’s own history. As a form of expression, fashion contains a host of ambiguities, enabling individuals to recreate the meanings ③ associated with specific pieces of clothing. Fashion is among the simplest and cheapest methods of self-expression: clothes can be ④ inexpensively purchased while making it easy to convey notions of wealth, intellectual stature, relaxation or environmental consciousness, even if none of these is true. Fashion can also strengthen agency in various ways, ⑤ opening up space for action.
* stature: 능력






30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Everywhere we turn we hear about almighty “cyberspace”! The hype promises that we will leave our boring lives, put on goggles and body suits, and enter some metallic, three-dimensional, multimedia otherworld. When the Industrial Revolution arrived with its great innovation, the motor, we didn’t leave our world to go to some ① remote motorspace! On the contrary, we brought the motors into our lives, as automobiles, refrigerators, drill presses, and pencil sharpeners. This ② absorption has been so complete that we refer to all these tools with names that declare their usage, not their “motorness.” These innovations led to a major socioeconomic movement precisely because they entered and ③ affected profoundly our everyday lives. People have not changed fundamentally in thousands of years. Technology changes constantly. It’s the one that must ④ adapt to us. That’s exactly what will happen with information technology and its devices under human-centric computing. The longer we continue to believe that computers will take us to a magical new world, the longer we will ⑤ maintain their natural fusion with our lives, the hallmark of every major movement that aspires to be called a socioeconomic revolution.
* hype: 과대광고 ** hallmark: 특징

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. There is something deeply paradoxical about the professional status of sports journalism, especially in the medium of print. In discharging their usual responsibilities of description and commentary, reporters’ accounts of sports events are eagerly consulted by sports fans, while in their broader  journalistic role of covering sport in its many forms, sports journalists are among the most visible of all contemporary writers. The ruminations of the elite class of ‘celebrity’ sports journalists  are much sought after by the major newspapers, their lucrative contracts being the envy of colleagues in other ‘disciplines’ of journalism. Yet sports journalists do not have a standing in  their profession that corresponds to the size of their readerships or of their pay packets, with the old saying (now reaching the status of clich?) that sport is the ‘toy department of the news media’ still readily to hand as a dismissal of the worth of what sports journalists do. This reluctance to take sports journalism seriously produces the paradoxical outcome that sports newspaper writers are much read but little 	.
* discharge: 이행하다 ** rumination: 생각
*** lucrative: 돈을 많이 버는
① paid	② admired
③ censored	④ challenged
⑤ discussed






32. People have always wanted to be around other people and  to learn from them. Cities have long been dynamos of social possibility, foundries of art, music, and fashion. Slang, or, if you prefer, “lexical innovation,” has always started in cities ― an outgrowth of all those different people so frequently exposed to one another. It spreads outward, in a manner not unlike trans- missible disease, which itself typically “takes off” in cities. If, as the noted linguist Leonard Bloomfield argued, the way a person talks is a “composite result of what he has heard before,” then language innovation would happen where the most people heard and talked to the most other people. Cities drive taste change because they 	, who not surprisingly are often the creative people cities seem to attract. Media, ever more global, ever more far-reaching, spread language faster to more people.
* foundry: 주물 공장 ** lexical: 어휘의
① provide rich source materials for artists
② offer the greatest exposure to other people
③ cause cultural conflicts among users of slang
④ present ideal research environments to linguists
⑤ reduce the social mobility of ambitious outsiders


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. The entrance to a honeybee colony, often referred to  as  the dancefloor, is a market place for information about the  state of the colony and the environment outside the hive. Studying interactions on the dancefloor provides us with a number of illustrative examples of how  individuals  changing their own behavior in response to local information
 	. For example, upon returning to their hive honeybees that have collected water search out a receiver bee to unload their water to within the hive. If this search time is short then the returning bee is more likely to perform a waggle dance to recruit others to the water source. Conversely, if this search time is long then the bee is more likely to give up collecting water. Since receiver bees will only accept water if they require it, either for themselves or to pass on to other bees and brood, this unloading time is correlated with the colony’s overall need of water. Thus the individual water forager’s response to unloading time (up or down) regulates water collection in response to the colony’s need. [3점]

35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Actors, singers, politicians and countless others  recognise the power of the human voice as a means of communication beyond the simple decoding of the words that are used. Learning to control your voice and use it for different purposes is, therefore, one of the most important skills to develop as an early career teacher. ① The more confidently you give instructions, the higher the chance of a positive class response. ② There are times when being able to project your voice loudly will be very useful when working in school, and knowing that you can cut through a noisy classroom, dinner hall or playground is a great skill to have. ③ In order to address serious noise issues in school, students, parents and teachers should search for a solution together. ④ However, I would always advise that you use your loudest voice incredibly sparingly and avoid shouting as much as possible. ⑤ A quiet, authoritative and measured tone has so much more impact than slightly panicked shouting.

* brood: 애벌레 ** forager: 조달자
① allow the colony to regulate its workforce
② search for water sources by measuring distance
③ decrease the colony’s workload when necessary
④ divide tasks according to their respective talents
⑤ train workers to acquire basic communication patterns

34. We understand that the segregation of our consciousness into present, past, and future is both a fiction and an oddly self-referential framework; your present was part of your mother’s future, and your children’s past will be in part your present. Nothing is generally wrong with structuring our consciousness of time in this conventional manner, and it often works well enough. In the case of climate change, however,  the sharp division of time into past, present, and future has been desperately misleading and has,  most  importantly, hidden from view the extent of the responsibility of those of   us alive now. The narrowing of our consciousness of time smooths the way to divorcing ourselves  from  responsibility for developments in the past and the future with which our lives are in fact deeply intertwined. In the climate case, it is not that
 	.  It is
that the realities are obscured from view by the partitioning of time, and so questions of responsibility toward the past and future do not arise naturally. [3점]
* segregation: 분리 ** intertwine: 뒤얽히게 하다
*** obscure: 흐릿하게 하다
① all our efforts prove to be effective and are thus encouraged
② sufficient scientific evidence has been provided to us
③ future concerns are more urgent than present needs
④ our ancestors maintained a different frame of time
⑤ we face the facts but then deny our responsibility







[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.

(A) That’s a clever trick, because producing spines and a helmet is costly, in terms of energy, and conserving energy is essential for an organism’s ability to survive and reproduce. The water flea only expends the energy needed to produce spines and a helmet when it needs to.
(B) If the baby water flea is developing into an adult in water that includes the chemical signatures of creatures  that  prey on water fleas, it develops a helmet and spines to defend itself against predators. If the water around it doesn’t include the chemical signatures of predators, the water flea doesn’t develop these protective devices.
(C) So it may well be that this plasticity is an adaptation: a  trait that came to exist in a species because it contributed to reproductive fitness. There are many cases, across  many species, of adaptive plasticity. Plasticity is conducive to fitness if there is sufficient variation in the environment.
* spine: 가시 돌기 ** conducive: 도움되는
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.


(A) Therefore, only an outcome in the client’s favor is compensated. From the client’s point of view, the pricing makes sense in part because most clients in these cases are unfamiliar with and possibly intimidated by law firms. Their biggest fears are high fees for a case that may take years to settle.
(B) By using contingency pricing, clients are ensured that they pay no fees until they receive a settlement. In these and other instances of contingency pricing, the economic value of the service is hard to determine before the service, and providers develop a price that allows them to share the risks and rewards of delivering value to the buyer.
(C) Contingency pricing is the major way that personal injury and certain consumer cases are billed. In this approach, lawyers do not receive fees or payment until the case is settled, when they are paid a percentage of the money that the client receives. [3점]
　
Negotiators should try to find ways to slice a large issue into smaller pieces, known as using salami tactics. ( ① ) Issues  that can be expressed in quantitative, measurable units are easy to slice. ( ② ) For example, compensation demands can be divided into cents-per-hour increments or lease rates can be quoted as dollars per square foot. ( ③ ) When working to fractionate issues of principle or precedent, parties may use the time horizon (when the principle goes into effect or how long it will last) as a way to fractionate the issue. ( ④ ) Another approach is to vary the number of ways that the principle may be applied. ( ⑤ ) For example, a company may devise a  family emergency leave plan that allows employees the opportunity to be away from the company for a period of no longer than three hours, and no more than once a month, for illness in the employee’s immediate family. [3점]
* increment: 증가 ** fractionate: 세분하다

* intimidate: 위협하다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
40. 
다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Parks take the shape demanded by the cultural concerns of their time. Once parks are in place, they are no inert stage ― their purposes and meanings are made and remade by planners and by park users. Moments of park creation are particularly telling, however, for they reveal and actualize ideas about nature and its relationship to urban society. ( ① ) Indeed, what distinguishes a park from the broader category of public space is the representation of nature that parks are meant to embody.  ( ② ) Public spaces include parks, concrete plazas, sidewalks, even indoor atriums. ( ③ ) Parks typically have trees, grass, and other plants as their central features. ( ④ ) When entering a city park, people often imagine a sharp separation from streets, cars, and buildings. ( ⑤ ) What’s behind  this idea is not only landscape architects’ desire to design aesthetically suggestive park spaces, but a much longer history of Western thought that envisions cities and nature as antithetical spaces and oppositional forces.
* aesthetically: 미적으로 ** antithetical: 대조적인












(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① persisted	… limit	② persisted	… cultivate
③ evolved	… accelerate	④ diminished … shape
⑤ diminished … restrict


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 














41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Power of Simple Formulas in Decision Making
② Always Prioritise: Tips for Managing Big Data
③ Algorithms’ Mistakes: The Myth of Simplicity
④ Be Prepared! Make a Checklist Just in Case
⑤ How Human Judgement Beats Algorithms


42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)



[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Hailey는 생일 케이크를 테이블로 무사히 옮겨 놓았다.
② 아버지는 생일 선물로 받은 안경을 직접 써 보았다.
③ Hailey는 아버지가 색맹이라는 사실을 최근에 알게 되었다.
④ Hailey와 Camila는 아버지의 집을 방문하였다.
⑤ 아버지는 자신의 나이와 똑같은 수의 장미를 받았다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2018학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역




6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.






1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.

① I bought them three days ago.
② You’re so good at designing shoes.
③ They’re very comfortable for running.
④ They were sold at a very cheap price.
⑤ I got them at a new shoe store downtown.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.

① That’s okay. Let’s see another movie.
② Right. I was impressed by the play, too.
③ Wait! We don’t have tickets for the show.
④ Good idea. My mom likes to watch movies.
⑤ Hurry up! We should get good seats in the theater.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 과식의 위험성을 경고하려고
② 천천히 식사하기를 권장하려고
③ 식단 관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
④ 다이어트에 좋은 음식을 소개하려고
⑤ 규칙적인 식사의 중요성을 강조하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 취미와 연관된 봉사 활동을 하는 것이 좋다.


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 피자 만들기	② 주방 청소하기
③ 식기 세팅하기	④ 아기 의자 가져오기
⑤ 음료수 준비하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 농구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 도서관에 가야 해서
② 아르바이트를 해야 해서
③ 문학 보고서를 써야 해서
④ 삼촌 댁을 방문해야 해서
⑤ 동생을 치과에 데려가야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27	② $30	③ $36	④ $40	⑤ $45


10. 대화를 듣고, Sky Adventure Event에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.


② 노인들을 위한 체력 단련 시설을 확충해야 한다.① 기간② 장소	③ 참가 연령③ 효과적인 봉사 활동을 위한 사전 교육이 필요하다.④ 활동 종류⑤ 입장권 가격④ 여가를 활용한 취미 생활은 일의 능률을 높여준다.
⑤ 지역 문화센터에 다양한 교양 강좌를 개설해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 교통경찰 ? 운전자	② 주유소 직원 ? 손님
③ 자동차 판매원 ? 고객	④ 운전 강사 ? 운전 연습생
⑤ 자동차 정비사 ? 자동차 주인
11. 
career counseling program에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오.

① 다섯 명의 전문 진로 상담사들이 초대된다.
② 다음 달 매주 목요일 오후에 진행될 것이다.
③ 상담사와 일대일 상담을 할 수 있다.
④ 참가하려면 신청서를 미리 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 개인별 상담 시간은 교내 게시판에 공지될 것이다.








12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 상품을 고르시오.
Flower Delivery

①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	

① I don’t agree. Too much exercise can be harmful.
② Trust me. You’ll be in good shape if you go to a gym.
③ No way. You shouldn’t skip your workouts that often.
④ Definitely. Working out at home has many advantages.
⑤ I bet. You can improve sociability through team sports.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① That’s right. You’ve been to Spain several times.
② You’re so kind. Thanks for helping me adapt here.
③ Good job! Your Spanish is much better than before.
④ Too bad. You’ll have to find another country to visit.
⑤ You’ll be fine. It could be a great experience for you.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ted가 Rachel에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ted:  	
① We need to empty the trash can to keep our room clean.
② I recommend you use less water to save the environment.
③ You should separate paper from other waste for recycling.
④ You ought to hand in your class paper before the due date.
⑤ You have to change your habit of spending money wastefully.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the history of respected music awards in the U.S.
② genres of African-American music in the 20th century
③ combinations of music styles throughout African history
④ the influence of African-American musicians in the world
⑤ development of different formats of American music shows

17. 언급된 음악이 아닌 것은?
① blues	② jazz	③ disco	④ funk	⑤ hip hop


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 취업 포트폴리오 작성을 위한 강좌 개설을 공지하려고
② 교직을 희망하는 학생들을 위한 강의를 부탁하려고
③ 대학 교직원 채용 규정의 수정을 제안하려고
④ 교직 세미나를 위한 강사 추천을 요청하려고
⑤ 무료 공개 강좌 일정의 변경을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We had decided to get away from the bombs, but the buses didn’t move. We waited and waited, but they didn’t go anywhere. It became so dark while we were sitting on the bus that we began to shiver at the sense of dread. I felt like a bomb was going to fall on us or that soldiers were going to come in. All of a sudden, I heard the loud sound of engines, and the buses started moving. I thought it was a dream. We drove for about thirty minutes, and then out the window I could see a big crowd of people who were waiting for us. Mommy said they were people who were going to help us. I almost couldn’t even believe it ― we were safe.
① fearful → relieved	② relaxed → worried
③ regretful → indifferent	④ envious → delighted
⑤ sympathetic → frightened

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Often the difference between feeling fulfilled at work and feeling empty, lost, annoyed, and burned out is all about whether or not you’re learning anything. This is another reason to listen. It’s amazing how much more you learn when you pause, quiet your mind, and listen to what others say. This is true for peers to your left and right as well as the very teams you lead. Sometimes it’s hard to listen to your boss or an executive, especially if you don’t agree 100 percent of the time. In some cases, you may not even like them. I get it. Remember, they’re in their roles for a reason, and they just might know a few things. Be open and willing to listen to what they say. You may not agree with everything you hear, but at least you listened. Even if you don’t agree with what they say or how they say it, you’ve learned what not to do or how not to say it.
① 경쟁보다는 협력을 통한 성취에 가치를 두어야 한다.
② 직장에서 배움을 통해 성취감을 느끼려면 경청해야 한다.
③ 관리자는 직원들에게 능력에 맞는 역할을 부여해야 한다.
④ 좋은 인간관계를 유지하려면 상대방의 입장을 배려해야 한다.
⑤ 성공적인 직장 생활을 위해 끊임없이 새로운 것에 도전해야 한다.








21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Some might think self-confidence is innate, or it is enough to feel it once and charge through the difficulties of life without hesitation. Bad news. Self-confidence is certainly not innate and there is no universal confidence. Practice and active repetition make the master. Standing up for myself once did start a change in me, but it didn’t grant me unlimited and never-ending confidence. It was just a start, a proof that I could be there for myself. If you have this belief, that you’re there for yourself, every situation seems more bearable, achievable or in my case, survivable. The more times you prove to yourself that you are there for yourself, and you’re enough to handle the situation, the more confident you’ll be.
① 보편적인 자신감은 누구에게나 내재되어 있다.
② 반복해서 자신을 지지함으로써 자신감을 키울 수 있다.
③ 상황에 대한 정확한 이해가 자신감 형성에 도움이 된다.
④ 자신감을 회복하려면 주변 사람들의 격려가 있어야 한다.
⑤ 지나친 자신감은 인생의 어려움을 극복하는 데 방해가 된다.









22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Some city planning experts called for legislation against texting while walking that would be followed by a deep change of norms. This recommendation is based on the assumption that this change is welcomed, but laws banning texting while walking failed in Toronto, Arkansas, Illinois, Nevada, New Jersey and New York. Meanwhile, high-tech firms are developing technological solutions to the problem, offering a transparent screen that allows pedestrians to see what is going on in front of them while texting. Another direction for adaptation to the problem was provided by city councils via better urban planning and interventions to generate awareness. Some towns and college campuses have put ‘look up’ signs in dangerous stairwells and intersections. Hong Kong added announcements in its subway system recommending that passengers look around; New York City reduced speeds for cars, and San Francisco fosters pedestrian-only corridors.
① the urgent necessity of regular safety drills in urban areas
② the serious effects of tech-addiction on cognitive abilities
③ different strategies to address the problem of texting walkers
④ unexpected reasons why legislation against texting while walking failed
⑤ major conflicts between advanced technology and outdated traffic systems
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A couple of years ago, I became interested in what we call hardship inoculation. This is the idea that struggling with a mental puzzle ― trying to remember a phone number or deciding what to do on a long Sunday afternoon ― inoculates you against future mental hardships just as vaccinations inoculate you against illness. There is good evidence to support the idea that small doses of mental hardship are good for us. Young adults do much better on tricky mental puzzles when they’ve solved difficult rather than easy ones earlier. Adolescent athletes also thrive on challenges: we’ve found, for example, that college basketball teams do better when their preseason schedules are more demanding. These mild initial struggles are critical. Depriving our kids of them by making everything easier is dangerous ― we just don’t know how dangerous.
① Have Vaccinations Always Proven to Be Effective?
② Physical Activities as the Driving Force for Mental Health
③ Give Young Adults a Chance to Escape Academic Pressure!
④ A Shot of Mental Hardship Vaccine to Ease Later Struggles
⑤ Demanding Puzzles: Obstacles to Follow-Up Mental Activities



24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Who’s Most Worried About Fake Content on the Web?
People who agree “I worry about what’s real and what’s fake on the Internet”


　The above graph shows the percentage of people from six countries who strongly agree or somewhat agree that they are worried about fake content on the Internet. ① 92 percent of Brazilian respondents agree that they are concerned about what is real and what is fake on the web. ② In Greece and France, the total percentage of people who strongly or somewhat agree is the same, but the percentage of people who strongly agree in Greece is higher than that in France. ③ In France, nearly 60 percent of people strongly agree, which is more than twice the amount of those who somewhat agree. ④ While the total percentage of people who strongly or somewhat agree is 76 percent in both the USA and Turkey, the percentage of people who somewhat agree in Turkey is three times higher than that in the USA. ⑤ Meanwhile, German respondents are the least worried about fake web content among the six countries, at 47 percent overall.








25. Maurice Maeterlinck에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Maurice Maeterlinck, the greatest symbolist playwright of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, was born on August 29, 1862, in Ghent, Belgium. He studied law and worked as a lawyer until 1889, when he decided to devote himself to writing. In 1897, Maeterlinck went to Paris, where he met many of the leading symbolist writers of the day. His first play, La Princesse Maleine (The Princess Maleine), was sent to major French symbolist poet and critic Mallarm? and became an immediate success. Another of his plays, L’Oiseau bleu (The Blue Bird), was an international success and has been adapted several times as a children’s book and a major motion picture. The phrase “the bluebird of happiness” derives from this enormously popular and enduring story. Maeterlinck won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1911. He died of a heart attack on May 6, 1949, in Nice, France.
① 변호사로 일을 하다가 글쓰기에 전념하기로 했다.
② 파리에서 당대의 많은 상징주의 작가들을 만났다.
③ 시인이자 비평가인 Mallarm?에게 보냈던 첫 극본이 실패했다.
④ 아동 도서와 영화로 각색된 국제적인 성공작이 있다.
⑤ 1911년에 노벨 문학상을 수상했다.

26. T-Shirt Design Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
27. 
E-Waste Collection Day에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는
것은?


① 토요일 오전에 진행되는 행사이다.
② Woodbury Campus 체육관에서 열린다.
③ 냉장고와 전구는 수거 대상 물품이다.
④ 차에서 물품을 내리는 것을 진행 요원이 도와준다.
⑤ 모든 수익금은 어린이 도서관에 기부된다.





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
















① 시카고 출신 영웅을 주제로 한 창작품이어야 한다.
② 최소한 세 가지 이상의 색을 사용해야 한다.
③ 출품작은 스캔해서 이메일로 제출해야 한다.
④ 1등 디자인은 영웅 퍼레이드 티셔츠에 사용될 것이다.
⑤ 제출물은 3월 마지막 날까지 받는다.
　
According to Pierre Pica,  understanding quantities approximately in terms of estimating ratios is a universal human intuition. In fact, humans who do not have numbers have no choice but ① to see the world in this way. By contrast, understanding quantities in terms of exact numbers is not a universal intuition; it is a product of culture. The precedence of approximations and ratios over exact numbers, Pica suggests,
② is due to the fact that ratios are much more important for survival in the wild than the ability to count. ③ Faced with a group of spear-wielding adversaries, we needed to know instantly whether there were more of them than us. When we saw two trees we needed to know instantly ④ that had more fruit hanging from it. In neither case was it ⑤ necessary to enumerate every enemy or every fruit individually. The crucial thing was to be able to make quick estimates of the relative amounts.
* enumerate: 일일이 세다








29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한
것은? [3점]
　Hypothesis is a tool which can cause trouble if not used properly. We must be ready to abandon or modify our hypothesis as soon as it is shown to be (A) consistent / inconsistent with the facts. This is not as easy as it sounds. When delighted by the way one’s beautiful idea offers promise of further advances, it is tempting to overlook an observation that does not fit into

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Hardly any discovery is possible without making use of knowledge gained by others. The vast store of scientific knowledge which is today available could never have been
built up if scientists did not pool their contributions. The publication of experimental results and observations so that they are available to others and open to criticism is one of
the fundamental principles on which modern science is based.

the pattern woven, or to try to explain it away. It is not at all	 	

is contrary to the best interests and spirit of

rare for investigators to adhere to their broken hypotheses,
turning a blind eye to contrary evidence, and not altogether unknown for them to (B) deliberately / unintentionally suppress contrary results. If the experimental results or observations are definitely opposed to the hypothesis or if they necessitate overly complicated or improbable subsidiary hypotheses to accommodate them, one has to (C) defend / discard the idea with as few regrets as possible. It is easier to drop the old hypothesis if one can find a new one to replace it. The feeling of disappointment too will then vanish.

science. It prevents the individual from contributing to further progress; it usually means that he or his employer is trying to exploit for their own gain some advance made by building on the knowledge which others have freely given. Much research is carried out in secret in industry and in government war departments. This seems to be inevitable in the world as it is today, but it is nevertheless wrong in principle. Ideally, freedom to publish should be a basic right of all research workers.

* subsidiary: 부차적인

(A) (B)	(C)
① consistent …… deliberately …… defend
② consistent   …… unintentionally …… discard
③ inconsistent …… deliberately  …… discard
④ inconsistent …… unintentionally …… discard
⑤ inconsistent …… deliberately …… defend









30. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? My mom worked as a nurse in a clinic in Vallejo, California.
One day a patient, Catherine, came into the clinic and my mom
admired her dress. The woman explained that ① she had made the dress and that she used to be a seamstress when she lived in her home country of Jamaica. She had recently moved to the
U.S. and hadn’t been able to bring her sewing machine with ② her and wasn’t able to afford to buy one. Soon after their meeting, my mom continued to think about this lovely Jamaican woman. There had to be something she could do to help ③ her. Searching the thrift shops in our area, my mom finally found a used sewing machine. It was the perfect gift for ④ her new acquaintance. It wasn’t long before my mom began bringing her clothing in need of repair or requiring alterations. Soon, Catherine was making clothes for our family. Eventually ⑤ she was able to start a small seamstress business.
* seamstress: 여자 재봉사

① Secrecy	② Imitation	③ Hesitancy
④ Popularity	⑤ Generosity











32. Hands are in fact used for typing in two senses of the word: We use fingers to write words with keyboards, and we also use them as input for 	. We can often tell
what type of person we are viewing by looking at his or her hands. In this way, hands communicate identity. Consider gender. One’s hands can indicate whether a person is masculine or feminine by use of culturally specific gender markers such as long nails, nail polish, or gendered jewelry. In India, henna paintings are made on the hands of a bride who is about to be married. In many cultures, a ring indicates marital status. Rings may also indicate personal interests, taste, and subculture. A skull ring may say “rocker,” a class ring may say “college graduate,” and a cross on one’s ring may say “Christian.” Ostentatiously jeweled rings can also convey financial wealth.
* ostentatiously: 과시적으로
① medical diagnosis
② social classification
③ creative expression
④ irrational judgement
⑤ psychological evaluation








33. It’s a well-known fact that the food industry uses colors such
as synthetic beta-carotene (an orange-yellow dye) in an attempt 	. Take margarine, for example: Its natural color is really more of a white, and its taste is oilier than that of yellow butter. The addition of beta-carotene makes margarine look more like butter, and it appears creamier than it really is. The “margarine question” goes back surprisingly far. In 1895, C. Petersen gave a lecture with that title at the general meeting of the Association of the German Dairy Industry in Berlin, which included a comment about the color of margarine. “We’ll have to raise the question as to why margarine is dyed the color of butter, and the only possible answer to that question is because it is believed that it will make people think that they are in fact consuming butter.” And even if this addition of color was presented as harmless, he added, it was still done “for the purpose of deception.” [3점]
① to simplify the manufacturing process
② to manipulate customer behavior
③ to minimize product spoilage
④ to enhance nutritional value
⑤ to intensify flavors












34. Automaticity works because it’s fast. All we need to do is hold an image in our mind, and our automated motor plan will
run off smoothly. But we, because we’re clever and think we know better, don’t let it. We interfere, by thinking. We think in words, and we can only process words slowly, so all we achieve is that we disrupt our automaticity. We allow our conscious mind (us) to dominate our subconscious mind (our habits and automated motor plans), trying to force our body through movements it doesn’t want to make. We do this because we’ve read books on technique and believe we know all the best angles, positions, and movements. But a better plan would be to allow our subconscious mind, which does know the best way to move, to get on with moving. Once we’ve automated a skill, we can 	. [3점]

① only damage it by thinking
② quickly acquire another skill
③ hardly make our bad habits go away
④ easily forget it without reinforcement
⑤ rarely think of it from a different angle
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　There is a widely accepted theory in social psychology known as the pratfall effect, which actually states that making certain kinds of mistakes makes you more likable because you are relatable in your vulnerability. ① This phenomenon has been tested and confirmed many times over, and remembering it can help you to feel better in times of embarrassment or shame. ② One simple example of the pratfall effect’s validity is that people tend to like a person who clumsily trips on video more than one who doesn’t trip in the video. ③ When we feel embarrassed, it’s natural to assume that others might like us less because we like ourselves a bit less in those moments. ④ Feelings such as nervousness or anxiety can sometimes make us concentrate more on other things, which helps us forget about the mistake.
⑤ But if we don’t take ourselves too seriously in those moments and bear them with a smile, it can even be attractive to others.










[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 



(A) As a result, it can cause us to use the wrong tool. We tend to consider using only the tools we have easily available, the tools we have actually learned how to use, and how we can use them to get our work done.
(B) This was a great strategy back in the Paleolithic days, when we had limited tools. It helped us to figure out how to take a stick or a rock (the only tool we might have) and knock fruit out of a tree so we didn’t starve.
(C) Today, however, we have multiple tools at our disposal. Some of them are good and some are not so good. However, this way of thinking is still hard-wired in our brain.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)






37.	39.
	


(A) And at some level, they were right, as anyone who has ever compared a tomato at room temperature with one from the fridge can confirm: one is sweetly fragrant and juicy; the other is metallic and dull. Every new technology includes both gain and loss.
(B) Yet there was a widespread terror of this new technology, from both buyers and sellers. Consumers were suspicious of food that had been kept in cold storage. Market traders, too, did not know how to think of this new chill. In the 1890s, some sellers in Paris felt that refrigeration would spoil their produce.
(C) Fridges were especially useful for storing perishable substances such as milk, which had previously been the cause of thousands of deaths every year in the big cities of the world. Refrigeration benefited traders too, creating a longer window of opportunity in which they could sell their food.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)





[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

Since the 1970s, more and more Maasai have given up the
traditional life of mobile herding and now dwell in permanent huts. ( ① ) This trend was started by government policies that encouraged subdivision of commonly held lands. ( ② ) In the 1960s, conventional conservation wisdom held that the Maasai’s roaming herds were overstocked, degrading the range and Amboseli’s fever-tree woodlands. ( ③ ) Settled, commercial ranching, it was thought, would be far more efficient. ( ④ ) The Maasai rejected the idea at first ? they knew they could not survive dry seasons without moving their herds to follow the availability of water and fresh grass. ( ⑤ ) As East Africa’s human population grows, Maasai people are subdividing their lands and settling down, for fear of otherwise losing everything. [3점]

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　Urbanization has been taking place since the Neolithic Revolution, when agriculture enabled food surpluses to create a division of labor in settlements. ( ① ) The unlocking of human ingenuity to work on technology, trade, and urban culture has created ever-expanding opportunities in cities. ( ② ) However, while some cities took advantage of these new opportunities, many remained little more than rural trading posts. ( ③ ) Urban opportunities accelerated with the Industrial Revolution and more recently with the globalization of the economy. ( ④ ) Some cities, such as Liverpool, Philadelphia, and Pittsburgh, have struggled to adapt to the new opportunities and have relied for too long on outmoded methods of industrial production. ( ⑤ ) Yet other cities, such as Manchester and New York, have made the transition and are thriving.




$


(A) (B)
① distracted …… reduction
② distracted …… improvement
③ focused	…… decline
④ challenged …… increase
⑤ challenged …… stability






[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
(C)

(D)










41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Applications of Optical Physics to Air Travel
② Human Beings See Only What They Want to See
③ Never-Ending Arguments on the Refraction of Light
④ What Makes Light Seem to Take the Optimal Course?
⑤ Mirage: A Phenomenon That Can’t Be Explained in Theory


42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① intentionality	② randomness
③ resistance	④ intensity
⑤ durability


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?

① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 젊은이에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 장학금을 받은 적이 없다.
② 판매 관리자로 채용되었다.
③ 열심히 일해서 동료들의 존경을 받았다.
④ 어머니가 세탁하는 것을 가끔 도왔다.
⑤ 어머니의 손은 주름지고 멍들어 있었다.





2019학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Let’s learn some new skills.
② I loved taking your craft class.
③ We don’t have a community center.
④ I bought them from an online store.
⑤ I want to make curtains for my sister.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. We’ll clean the room before we leave.
② Really? I can’t believe you lost the competition.
③ Good. The choir performance was a success.
④ I’m sorry. I can’t play a musical instrument.
⑤ Right. You need to practice a lot.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 미술 작품 전시회를 홍보하려고
② 예술제 참여를 독려하려고
③ 미술 시험을 안내하려고
④ 미술실 이용 시간을 공지하려고
⑤ 박물관 관람 규칙 준수를 당부하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 어린이집 추가 설립의 필요성
② 장난감 대여 서비스 이용의 장점
③ 어린이 대상 환경 교육의 중요성
④ 놀이가 아동 발달에 미치는 영향
⑤ 나이에 따른 장난감 선호도의 변화


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사진작가 － 무용가
② 사회자 － 초청 강사
③ 음악 평론가 － 작곡가
④ 조명 기사 － 영화감독
⑤ 공연장 관리자 － 피아니스트


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 소품 구매하기	② 포스터 붙이기
③ 배우들 분장하기	④ 가을 축제 기획하기
⑤ 무대 배경 제작하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 농구경기에 출전하지 않는 이유를 고르시오.
① 해외 출장을 가야 해서
② 매출 보고서를 작성해야 해서
③ 지역 병원에서 봉사해야 해서
④ 정기 건강 검진을 받아야 해서
⑤ 아버지의 은퇴 파티에 참석해야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $140	② $160	③ $180	④ $240	⑤ $260


10. 대화를 듣고, Middleton Public Hearing에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 주제	② 개최 일시	③ 개최 장소
④ 전문가 패널	⑤ 질문 기회 유무


11. Megan’s Bites에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 수제 과자로 유명하다.
② 주인의 할머니가 만든 조리법을 사용한다.
③ 겉은 바삭하고 속은 부드러운 과자를 만든다.
④ 2017년에 Dessert Magazine에 의해 최고의 과자가게로 선정됐다.
⑤ 다음 달에 New York에 2호점을 열 예정이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 노트북 컴퓨터 배낭을 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Laptop Backpacks




①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① No way. My know-how doesn’t come from reading books.
② Right. Selecting winners that way seems fair to students.
③ Yes. I’ve always wanted to become a famous inventor.
④ Good. The first-graders usually prefer social sciences.
⑤ Sorry. You should use your creativity for the project.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Alright. I’ll take an offline course then.
② Not really. There’s no time to study now.
③ Sure. I managed to pass the test this morning.
④ Great. I was going to give you a wake-up call.
⑤ No. Online classes were not available last summer.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian이 Ms. Clark에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian:   	
① You should judge students by their performance.
② I apologize for not joining the cheerleading team.
③ We’re not allowed to participate in the competition.
④ It was a good experience coaching you last semester.
⑤ We’re thankful for all the hard work you’ve done for us.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects of food on sleep
② causes of eating disorders
③ ways to improve digestion
④ what not to eat to lose weight
⑤ importance of a balanced diet for health

17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① bananas	② milk	③ cereal
④ French fries	⑤ candies
















① 도서 박람회 자원 봉사자를 모집하려고
② 아동 도서를 기부하는 방법을 안내하려고
③ 지역 아동들의 독서량 조사를 제안하려고
④ 독서 교육 프로그램 참여 방법을 문의하려고
⑤ 어린이 도서관 설립을 위한 기부를 독려하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Emma의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? ‘How much farther to the finish line? Can I make it?’ Emma felt pain in her legs and was breathing heavily. She couldn’t
remember ever being so exhausted. Feeling frustrated, she began to think about giving up on the race. She knew she would regret it later, but it seemed like there was nothing she could do. Then, she remembered a strategy she had learned. By having strong imagery control, she could help herself achieve her goal. Over and over, Emma imagined herself running smoothly and breathing easily. It was working! She started to feel better. About thirty minutes later, she found herself crossing the finish line with a big smile on her face. Surrounded by cheering friends, she enjoyed her victory full of joy.
① calm        → terrified	② furious → relaxed
③ thrilled    → ashamed	④ discouraged → delighted
⑤ confused → indifferent
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Life is hectic. Our days are filled with so many of the “have tos” that we feel there’s no time left for the “want tos.” Further, spending all our time with others doesn’t give us the ability to hit the reset button and relax. Leaving little to no time for ourselves or for the things that are important to us can lead to unmanaged stress, frustration, fatigue, resentment, or worse, health issues. Building in regular “you time,” however, can provide numerous benefits, all of which help to make life a little bit sweeter and a little bit more manageable. Unfortunately, many individuals struggle with reaching goals due to an inability to prioritize their own needs. Alone time, however, forces you to take a break from everyday responsibilities and the requirements of others so you can dedicate time to move forward with your own goals, meet your own personal needs, and further explore your personal dreams.
* hectic: 매우 바쁜
① 자신을 위한 시간을 확보하여 원하는 바를 추구할 필요가 있다.
② 타인과의 정기적인 교류를 통해 스트레스를 해소해야 한다.
③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하려면 체계적인 시간 관리가 중요하다.
④ 개인의 이익과 공공의 이익 간의 조화를 이루어야 한다.
⑤ 업무의 우선순위는 동료와 협의하여 정해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 “a link in a chain, a phase in a process”가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi suggests that the common idea of a creative individual coming up with great insights, discoveries, works, or inventions in isolation is wrong. Creativity results from a complex interaction between a person and his or her environment or culture, and also depends on timing. For instance, if the great Renaissance artists like Ghiberti or Michelangelo had been born only 50 years before they were, the culture of artistic patronage would not have been in place to fund or shape their great achievements. Consider also individual astronomers: Their discoveries could not have happened unless centuries of technological development of the telescope and evolving knowledge of the universe had come before them. Csikszentmihalyi’s point is that we should devote as much attention to the development of a domain as we do to the people working within it, as only this can properly explain how advances are made. Individuals are only “a link in a chain, a phase in a process,” he notes.
* patronage: 보호, 후원, 찬조
① Individuals’ creativity results only from good fortune.
② Discoveries can be made only due to existing knowledge.
③ One’s genius is a key element of a series of breakthroughs.
④ Individuals receive no credit for their creative achievements.
⑤ Individual creativity emerges only in its necessary conditions.





22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Consumers like a bottle of wine more if they are told it cost ninety dollars a bottle than if they are told it cost ten. Belief that the wine is more expensive turns on the neurons in the medial orbitofrontal cortex, an area of the brain associated with pleasure feelings. Wine without a price tag doesn’t have this effect. In 2008, American food and wine critics teamed up with a statistician from Yale and a couple of Swedish economists to study the results of thousands of blind tastings of wines ranging from $1.65 to $150 a bottle. They found that when they can’t see the price tag, people prefer cheaper wine to pricier bottles. Experts’ tastes did move in the proper direction: they favored finer, more expensive wines. But the bias was almost imperceptible. A wine that cost ten times more than another was ranked by experts only seven points higher on a scale of one to one hundred.
* medial orbitofrontal cortex: 내측 안와(眼窩) 전두 피질
① 소비자는 와인 구매 시 전문가의 평가를 적극적으로 참고한다.
② 가격 정보는 소비자의 와인 상품 선호도에 영향을 미친다.
③ 비싼 와인의 대량 구매는 소비자의 쾌감 신경을 자극한다.
④ 와인의 판매 가격은 와인의 품질과 비례하여 결정된다.
⑤ 와인의 품질은 원산지와 생산 연도에 따라 달라진다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　1950s critics separated themselves from the masses by rejecting the ‘natural’ enjoyment afforded by products of mass culture through judgments based on a refined sense of realism. For example, in most critics championing Douglas Sirk’s films’ social critique, self-reflexivity, and, in particular, distancing effects, there is still a refusal of the ‘vulgar’ enjoyments suspected of soap operas. This refusal again functions to divorce the critic from an image of a mindless, pleasure-seeking crowd he or she has actually manufactured in order to definitively secure the righteous logic of ‘good’ taste. It also pushes negative notions of female taste and subjectivity. Critiques of mass culture seem always to bring to mind a disrespectful image of the feminine to represent the depths of the corruption of the people. The process of taste-making operated, then, to create hierarchical differences between the aesthete and the masses through the construction of aesthetic positions contrary to the perceived tasteless pleasures of the crowd.
* vulgar: 저속한, 서민의 ** aesthetic: 미학의, 심미적인
① critics’ negative view on popular tastes and its effects
② criticism of cultural hierarchy in soap operas and films
③ side effects of popularized cultural products on crowds
④ resistance of the masses to cultural separations and  its origins
⑤ critics’ tendency to identify the refined tastes of the masses



24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Radioactive waste disposal has become one of the key environmental battlegrounds over which the future of nuclear power has been fought. Environmentalists argue that no system of waste disposal can be absolutely safe, either now or in the future. Governments and the nuclear industry have tried to find acceptable solutions. But in countries where popular opinion is taken into consideration, no mutually acceptable solution has been found. As a result, most spent fuel has been stored in the nuclear power plants where it was produced. This is now causing its own problems as storage ponds designed to store a few years’ waste become filled or overflowing. One avenue that has been explored is the reprocessing of spent fuel to remove the active ingredients. Some of the recovered material can be recycled as fuel. The remainder must be stored safely until it has become inactive. But reprocessing has proved expensive and can exacerbate the problem of disposal rather than assisting it. As a result, it too appears publicly unacceptable.
* exacerbate: 악화시키다
① Are Nuclear Power Plants Really Dangerous?
② How to Improve Our Waste Disposal System
③ No Benefits: Nuclear Power Plants Are Deceiving Us
④ An Unresolved Dilemma in Dealing with Nuclear Waste
⑤ Ignorance Is Not a Blessing: Policies for Nuclear Issues!


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	

25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?	27. LnT-Bot에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　This graph shows the distribution of university graduates in Canada by age group in 1996, 2001, and 2007. ① Although its share was less than 50% in each of the three years, the group of university graduates aged 22 to 24 accounted for the largest single share in those respective years. ② The second largest single share of university graduates in each of the three years
was held by those who were 25 to 29 years old. ③ The share of university graduates who were 30 years old and over was higher than 20% in each of the three years. ④ In 1996, the share of the group of university graduates aged 18 to 21 was
7.7%, and the share of the same age group was 6% in 2001.
⑤ In 2007, the combined share of those who were 25 to 29 years old and those who were 30 years old and over accounted for more than 50% of that year’s university graduates.






26. Victor Borge에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Victor Borge, born in Copenhagen, Denmark in 1909, was a comedian and pianist. Initially a concert musician, Victor Borge soon developed a performance style that combined comedy
with classical music. When the Nazis invaded Denmark in 1940, he was performing in Sweden, and a short time later managed to escape to America. When he arrived in the U.S., he didn’t speak a word of English. Learning English by watching movies, he soon managed to translate his jokes for the American audience. In 1948, Victor Borge became an American citizen and a few years later was offered a show of his own, Comedy in Music. The show remains the longest-running one-man show in Broadway history. At the age of 90, he still performed 60 times a year. He died on December 23rd, 2000 at his home in Greenwich, Connecticut, U.S.
① 코미디와 고전 음악을 결합한 공연 스타일을 개발했다.
② 나치가 덴마크를 침공했을 때, 미국에서 공연을 하고 있었다.
③ 1948년에 미국 시민이 되었다.
④ 90세에도 여전히 일 년에 60회의 공연을 했다.
⑤ 2000년 12월 23일에 생을 마감했다.

LnT-Bot
Your Child’s Perfect Friend for Learning
◈ Learning Modes
LnT-Bot features three learning modes:
?alphabet letters and sounds
?names of objects
?numbers and counting
◈ Learning Chips
?30 learning chips are included.
?Insert  a  chip  in  LnT-Bot’s  forehead  slot  and  pictures  will appear on the LCD screen.
◈ Fun Features
?Say “Hi, Bot,” and LnT-Bot will say “Hello” back.
?Clap your hands once, and LnT-Bot will dance.
?Clap your hands twice, and LnT-Bot will sing one of 10 recorded songs.

① 사물 이름 학습 모드가 있다.
② 30개의 학습용 칩이 포함되어 있다.
③ 이마의 슬롯에 칩을 넣으면, LCD 화면에 그림이 나타난다.
④ “Hi, Bot”이라고 말하면, “Hello”라고 대답한다.
⑤ 박수를 한 번 치면, 녹음된 노래 중 한 곡을 부른다.

28. 2018 Notac High School Book Review Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

2018 Notac High School Book Review Contest
　Notac High School is now accepting your original and critical book reviews.
▣ Submission
?When:  From September 10, 2018 to September 21, 2018
?How:  Submit your book reviewby email toadmin@notachs.net.
▣ Divisions
Each participant must enter one of the divisions below. (Only one entry per participant)
?Poetry	?Fiction	?Non-fiction
▣ Guidelines
?Your review must:
1. Be your own work.
2. Be written about a book on the given booklist.
3. Be less than 1,500 words.
* Winners will be announced on the school website on October 1, 2018. No individual notifications will be made.
For more information, visit www.notachs.net.

① 이메일로는 서평을 제출할 수 없다.
② 여러 부문에 중복하여 참가할 수 있다.
③ 제공된 도서 목록에 있는 책에 대해 서평을 써야 한다.
④ 서평은 1,500 단어 이상이어야 한다.
⑤ 수상자는 개별적으로 통보받는다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Not all organisms are able to find sufficient food to survive, so starvation is a kind of disvalue often found in  nature. It also is part of the process of selection ① by which biological evolution functions. Starvation helps filter out those less fit to survive, those less resourceful in finding food for ② themselves and their young. In some circumstances, it may pave the way for genetic variants ③ to take hold in the population of a species and eventually allow the emergence of a new species in place of the old one. Thus starvation is a disvalue that can help make
④ possible the good of greater diversity. Starvation can be of practical or instrumental value, even as it is an intrinsic disvalue. ⑤ What some organisms must starve in nature is deeply regrettable and sad. The statement remains implacably true, even though starvation also may sometimes subserve ends that are good.
* implacably: 확고히 ** subserve: 공헌하다





30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　For every toxic substance, process, or product in use today, there is a safer alternative ― either already in existence, or waiting to be discovered through the application of human intellect, ingenuity, and effort. In almost every case, the safer alternative is (A) available / unavailable at a comparable cost. Industry may reject these facts and complain about the high cost of acting, but history sets the record straight. The  chemical industry denied that there were practical alternatives to ozone-depleting chemicals, (B) predicting / preventing not only economic disaster but numerous deaths because food and vaccines would spoil without refrigeration. They were wrong. The motor vehicle industry initially denied that cars caused air pollution, then claimed that no technology existed to reduce pollution from vehicles, and later argued that installing devices to reduce air pollution would make cars extremely expensive. They were wrong every time. The pesticide industry argues that synthetic pesticides are absolutely (C) necessary / unnecessary to grow food. Thousands of organic farmers are  proving  them wrong.
* deplete: 고갈시키다 ** synthetic pesticide: 합성 살충제
(A)	(B)	(C)
① available    …… predicting  …… necessary
② available    …… preventing …… necessary
③ available    …… predicting  …… unnecessary
④ unavailable …… preventing …… unnecessary
⑤ unavailable …… predicting …… necessary

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Among the most fascinating natural temperature-regulating behaviors are those of social insects such as bees and ants. These insects are able to maintain a nearly constant temperature in their hives or mounds throughout the year. The constancy of these microclimates depends not just on the location and insulation of the habitat, but on 	. When the surrounding temperature increases, the activity in  the hive decreases, which decreases the amount of heat generated by insect metabolism. In fact, many animals decrease their activity in the heat and increase it in the cold, and people who are allowed to choose levels of physical activity in hot or cold environments adjust their workload precisely to body temperature. This behavior serves to avoid both hypothermia and hyperthermia.
* insulation: 단열 ** hypothermia: 저체온(증) *** hyperthermia: 고체온(증)
① the activity of the insects in the colony
② the interaction with other species
③ the change in colony population
④ the building materials of the habitat
⑤ the physical development of the inhabitants











32. Although most people, including Europe’s Muslims, have numerous identities, few of these are politically salient at any moment. It is only when a political issue affects the welfare of those  in  a  particular group that 	. For instance, when issues arise that touch on women’s rights, women start to think of gender as their principal identity. Whether such women are American or Iranian or whether they are Catholic or Protestant matters less than the fact that they  are women. Similarly, when famine and civil war threaten people in sub-Saharan Africa, many African-Americans are reminded of their kinship with the continent in which their ancestors originated centuries earlier, and they lobby their leaders to provide humanitarian relief. In other words, each issue calls forth somewhat different identities that help explain the political preferences people have regarding those issues. [3점]
* salient: 두드러진
① identity assumes importance
② religion precedes identity
③ society loses stability
④ society supports diversity
⑤ nationality bears significance



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Food unites as well as distinguishes eaters because what  and how one eats forms much of one’s emotional tie  to  a group identity, be it a nation or an ethnicity. The famous twentieth-century Chinese poet and scholar Lin Yutang remarks, “Our love for fatherland is largely a matter of recollection of the keen sensual pleasure of our childhood. The loyalty to Uncle Sam is the loyalty to American doughnuts,  and the loyalty to the Vaterland is the loyalty to Pfannkuchen and Stollen.” Such keen connection between food and national or ethnic identification clearly indicates the truth that cuisine and table narrative occupy a significant place in the training grounds of a community and its civilization, and thus, eating, cooking,   and   talking   about   one’s   cuisine   are   vital   to
 	. In other words, the destiny of a community depends on how well it nourishes its members.
* nourish: 기르다
① an individual’s dietary choices
② one’s diverse cultural experiences
③ one’s unique personality and taste
④ a community’s wholeness and continuation
⑤ a community’s dominance over other cultures











34. Modern psychological theory states that the process of understanding is a matter of construction, not reproduction, which means that the process of understanding takes the form of the interpretation of data coming from the outside and generated by our mind. For example, the perception of a moving object as a car is based on an interpretation of incoming data within the framework of our knowledge of the world. While the interpretation of simple objects is usually an uncontrolled process, the interpretation of more complex phenomena, such as interpersonal situations, usually requires active attention and thought. Psychological studies indicate that it is knowledge possessed by the individual that determines which stimuli become the focus of that individual’s attention, what significance he or she assigns to these stimuli, and how they are combined into a larger whole. This subjective world, interpreted in a particular way, is for us the “objective” world; we cannot know any world other than 	. [3점]
① the reality placed upon us through social conventions
② the one we know as a result of our own interpretations
③ the world of images not filtered by our perceptual frame
④ the external world independent of our own interpretations
⑤ the physical universe our own interpretations fail to explain
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　While the transportation infrastructure may shape where we travel today, in the early eras of travel, it determined whether people could travel at all. ① The development and improvement of  transportation  was  one  of  the  most  important  factors  in
allowing modern tourism to develop on a large scale and become a regular part of the lives of billions of people around the world. ② Another important factor was the industrialization that led to more efficient transportation of factory products to consumers than ever before. ③ Technological advances provided the basis for the explosive expansion of local, regional, and global transportation networks and made travel faster, easier, and cheaper. ④ This not only created new tourist-generating and tourist-receiving regions but also prompted a host of other changes in the tourism infrastructure, such as accommodations.
⑤ As a result, the availability of transportation infrastructure and services has been considered a fundamental precondition for tourism.
* infrastructure: 산업 기반 시설



[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) Emotional eating is a popular term used to describe eating that is influenced by emotions, both positive and negative. Feelings may affect various aspects of your eating, including your motivation to eat, your food choices,  where and with whom you eat, and the speed at which   you eat. Most overeating is prompted by feelings rather than physical hunger.
(B) Yet there is often a disconnect between what we know and what we do. We may have the facts, but decisions also involve our feelings. Many people who struggle with difficult emotions also struggle with eating problems.
(C) Individuals who struggle with obesity tend to eat in response to emotions. However, people who eat for emotional reasons are not necessarily overweight. People of any size may try to escape an emotional experience by preoccupying themselves with eating or by obsessing over their shape and weight. [3점]
* obsess: 강박감을 갖다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 


　Ever since the first scientific opinion polls revealed that most Americans are at best poorly informed about politics, analysts have asked whether citizens are equipped to play the role democracy assigns them.

39.


We become entrusted to teach culturally appropriate behaviors, values, attitudes, skills, and information about the world.
Erikson believes that when we reach the adult years, several

(A) Such factors, however, can explain only the misinformation that has always been with us. The sharp rise in misinformation in recent years has a different source: our media. “They are making us dumb,” says one observer. When fact bends to fiction, the predictable result is political distrust and polarization.
(B) It’s the difference between ignorance and irrationality. Whatever else one might conclude about self-government, it’s at risk when citizens don’t know what they’re talking about. Our misinformation owes partly to psychological factors, including our tendency to see the world in ways that suit our desires.
(C) However, there is something worse than an inadequately informed public, and that’s a misinformed public. It’s one thing when citizens don’t know something, and realize it, which has always been a problem. It’s another thing when citizens don’t know something, but think they know it, which is the new problem.

physical, social, and psychological stimuli trigger a sense of generativity. A central component of this attitude is the desire to care for others. ( ① ) For the majority of people, parenthood is perhaps the most obvious  and  convenient opportunity to fulfill this desire. ( ② ) Erikson believes that another distinguishing feature of adulthood is the emergence of an inborn desire to teach. ( ③ ) We become aware of this desire when the event of being physically capable of reproducing is joined with the events of participating in a committed relationship, the establishment of an adult pattern of living, and the assumption of job responsibilities. ( ④ ) According to Erikson, by becoming parents we learn that we have the need to be needed by others who depend on our knowledge, protection, and guidance. ( ⑤ ) By assuming the responsibilities of being primary caregivers to children through their long years of physical and social growth, we concretely express what Erikson believes to be an inborn desire to teach. [3점]

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

* poll: 여론 조사
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

Moreover, more than half of Americans age 18 and older derive benefits from various transfer programs, while paying little or no personal income tax.
　Both the budget deficit and federal debt have soared during the recent financial crisis and recession. ( ① ) During 2009－2010,  nearly  40  percent  of federal  expenditures were
financed by borrowing. (  ② ) The huge recent federal  deficits
have pushed the federal debt to levels not seen since the years immediately following World War II. ( ③ ) The rapid growth of baby-boomer retirees in the decade immediately ahead will mean higher spending levels and larger and larger deficits for both Social Security and Medicare. ( ④ ) All of these factors are going to make it extremely difficult to slow the growth of federal spending and keep the debt from ballooning out of control. ( ⑤ ) Projections indicate that the net federal debt   will rise to 90 percent of GDP by 2019, and many believe it will be even higher unless constructive action is taken soon.
* deficit: 부족, 결손 ** federal: 연방의 *** soar: 급등하다, 치솟다











For indigenous peoples forests serve as a source of
 	(A)	resources, while national and global perspectives prioritize the 	(B)	of forests, despite the local needs.

(A) (B)
① transformable …… preservation
② transformable …… practicality
③ consumable	…… manipulation
④ restorable	…… potential
⑤ restorable	…… recovery


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D)












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Family Stories Disclose a Couple’s True Faces
② Shaping a Couple: Reconstructing Family Stories
③ Reconstructing the Foundation of Family Reunion
④ Reconstruction of Love: Recalling Parents’ Episodes
⑤ Beyond Couples’ Problems: Reconstructing Harmony

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Sally는 두 달 동안 새를 공부하는 데 몰두해 왔었다.
② Jennifer는 대학교에서 근무하는 새 전문가이다.
③ Jason은 Sally가 새 관찰자로서 재능이 있다는 것을 알게 되었다.
④ Jason과 Sally는 Jennifer의 사무실을 방문했다.
⑤ Jennifer는 Sally가 희귀한 새를 보았다는 말을 처음부터 믿었다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2020학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의  내용과 일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll send the address to your phone.
② Yes. I’ll have your dress cleaned by noon.
③ Of course. I’ll open the shop tomorrow.
④ No. I’m not moving to a new place.
⑤ Too late. I’m already back at home.





2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Unbelievable. I’m really going to be on stage today.
② Absolutely. I’m so eager to see him sing in person.
③ Not really. He wasn’t as amazing as I expected.
④ Sure. I’ll find someone else to perform instead.
⑤ Oh, no. You shouldn’t have missed his performance.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 백화점 주말 특별 행사를 안내하려고
② 백화점 층별 신규 매장을 소개하려고
③ 주차장 이용 요금 변경을 공지하려고
④ 고객 만족도 조사 참여를 요청하려고
⑤ 백화점 회원 가입 방법을 설명하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 왼쪽 신체의 잦은 사용은 두뇌 활동을 촉진한다.
② 수면 시간과 심장 기능은 밀접한 관련이 있다.
③ 왼쪽으로 누워 자는 것은 건강에 도움이 된다.
④ 규칙적인 운동은 소화 불량 개선에 필수적이다.
⑤ 숙면은 정신 건강을 유지하는 데 중요한 요인이다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 곤충학자 － 학생	② 동물 조련사 － 사진작가
③ 농부 － 잡지기자	④ 요리사 － 음식 평론가
⑤ 독자 － 소설가
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 간식 가져오기	② 책 기부하기
③ 점심 준비하기	④ 설거지하기
⑤ 세탁실 청소하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 요리 대회 참가를 포기한 이유를 고르시오.
① 다친 팔이 낫지 않아서
② 조리법을 완성하지 못해서
③ 다른 대회와 일정이 겹쳐서
④ 입학시험 공부를 해야 해서
⑤ 대회 전에 유학을 떠나야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $72	② $74	③ $76	④ $78	⑤ $80


10. 대화를 듣고, Ten Year Class Reunion Party에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 날짜	③ 회비
④ 음식	⑤ 기념품


11. Green Ocean  영화 시사회에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 100명을 초대할 예정이다.
② 다음 주 토요일 오후 4시에 시작할 것이다.
③ 영화 출연 배우와 사진을 찍을 수 있다.
④ 입장권을 우편으로 보낼 예정이다.
⑤ 초대받은 사람은 극장에서 포스터를 받을 것이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 항공편을 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Flight Schedule to New York City Area

①
②
③
④
⑤


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① It’s worthwhile to spend money on my suit.
② It would be awesome to borrow your brother’s.
③ Your brother will have a fun time at the festival.
④ I’m looking forward to seeing you in a new suit.
⑤ You’re going to build a great reputation as an MC.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Definitely! This book isn’t as interesting as yours.
② Terrific! I’ll check right away if there are any nearby.
③ Never mind. I won’t take that course next semester.
④ Really? I didn’t know you have a degree in philosophy.
⑤ Why not? You can join my philosophy discussion group.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian의 어머니가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian’s mother:   	
① Make sure to call me whenever you go somewhere new.
② School trips are good opportunities to make friends.
③ I believe traveling broadens your perspective.
④ How about carrying the luggage on your own?
⑤ Why don’t you pack your bag by yourself for the trip?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① animals used in delivering mail in history
② difficulty of training animals from the wild
③ animals’ adaptation to environmental changes
④ endangered animals in different countries
⑤ ways animals sent each other messages

17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① horses	② pigeons	③ eagles
④ dogs	⑤ camels








① 애완견 예방 접종 일정을 확인하려고
② 애완견 공원의 야간 이용 시간을 문의하려고
③ 아파트 내 애완견 출입 금지 구역을 안내하려고
④ 아파트 인근에 개장한 애완견 공원을 홍보하려고
⑤ 애완견 공원의 야간 소음 방지 대책을 촉구하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jonas의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Looking out the bus window, Jonas could not stay calm. He had been looking forward to this field trip. It was the first field trip for his history course. His history professor had recommended it to the class, and Jonas had signed up enthusiastically. He was the first to board the bus in the morning. The landscape looked fascinating as the bus headed to Alsace. Finally arriving in Alsace after three hours on the road, however, Jonas saw nothing but endless agricultural fields. The fields were vast,  but hardly appealed to him. He had expected to see some old castles and historical monuments, but now he saw nothing like that awaiting him. “What can I learn from these boring fields?” Jonas said to himself with a sigh.
① excited → disappointed	② indifferent → thrilled
③ amazed → horrified	④ surprised  → relieved
⑤ worried → confident
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Probably the biggest roadblock to play for adults is the worry that they will look silly, improper, or dumb if they allow themselves to truly play. Or they think that it is irresponsible, immature, and childish to give themselves regularly over to play. Nonsense and silliness come naturally to kids, but they get pounded out by norms that look down on “frivolity.” This is particularly true for people who have been valued for performance standards set by parents or the educational system, or measured by other cultural norms that are internalized and no longer questioned. If someone has spent his adult life worried about always appearing respectable, competent, and knowledgeable, it can be hard to let go sometimes and become physically and emotionally free. The thing is this: You have to give yourself permission to improvise, to mimic, to take on a long-hidden identity.
* frivolity: 경박함 ** improvise: 즉흥적으로 하다
① 어른도 규범에 얽매이지 말고 자유롭게 놀이를 즐겨야 한다.
② 아동에게 사회 규범을 내면화할 수 있는 놀이를 제공해야 한다.
③ 개인의 창의성을 극대화할 수 있는 놀이 문화를 조성해야 한다.
④ 타인의 시선을 의식하지 않고 자신의 목표 달성에 매진해야 한다.
⑤ 어른을 위한 잠재력 계발 프로그램에서 놀이의 비중을 늘려야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 playing intellectual air guitar가 다음 글에서 의미 하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Any learning environment that deals with only the database instincts or only the improvisatory instincts ignores one half of our ability. It is bound to fail. It makes me think of jazz guitarists: They’re not going to make it if they know a lot  about music theory but don’t know how to jam in a live concert. Some schools and workplaces emphasize a stable, rote-learned database. They ignore the improvisatory instincts drilled into us for millions of years. Creativity suffers. Others emphasize creative usage of a database, without installing a fund of knowledge in the first place. They ignore our need to obtain a deep understanding of a subject, which includes memorizing and storing a richly structured database. You get people who are great improvisers but don’t have depth of knowledge. You may know someone like this where  you  work. They may look like jazz musicians and have the appearance of jamming, but in the end they know nothing. They’re playing intellectual air guitar.
* rote-learned: 기계적으로 암기한
① acquiring necessary experience to enhance their creativity
② exhibiting artistic talent coupled with solid knowledge of music
③ posing as experts by demonstrating their in-depth knowledge
④ performing musical pieces to attract a highly educated audience
⑤ displaying seemingly creative ability not rooted in firm knowledge




22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In retrospect, it might seem surprising that something as mundane as the desire to count sheep was the driving force for an advance as fundamental as written language. But the desire for written records has always accompanied economic activity, since transactions are meaningless unless you can clearly keep track of who owns what. As such, early human writing is dominated by wheeling and dealing: a collection of bets, bills, and contracts. Long before we had the writings of the prophets, we had the writings of the profits. In fact, many civilizations never got to the stage of recording and leaving behind the kinds of great literary works that we often associate with the history of culture. What survives these ancient societies is, for the  most part, a pile of receipts. If it weren’t for the commercial enterprises that produced those records, we would know far, far less about the cultures that they came from.
* mundane: 세속의 ** prophet: 예언자
① 고대 사회에서 경제 활동은 문자 기록의 원동력이었다.
② 고전 문학을 통해 당대의 경제 활동을 파악할 수 있다.
③ 경제 발전의 정도가 문명의 발달 수준을 결정한다.
④ 종교의 역사는 상업의 역사보다 먼저 시작되었다.
⑤ 모든 문명이 위대한 작가를 배출한 것은 아니다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Human beings do not enter the world as competent moral agents. Nor does everyone leave the world in that state. But somewhere in between, most people acquire a bit of decency that qualifies them for membership in the community of moral agents. Genes, development, and learning all contribute to the process of becoming a decent human being. The interaction between nature and nurture is, however, highly complex, and developmental biologists are only just beginning to grasp just how complex it is. Without the context provided by cells, organisms, social groups, and culture, DNA is inert. Anyone who says that people are “genetically programmed” to be moral has an oversimplified view of how genes work. Genes and environment interact in ways that make it nonsensical to think that the process of moral development in children, or any other developmental process, can be discussed in terms of nature versus nurture. Developmental biologists now know that it is really both, or nature through nurture. A complete scientific explanation of moral evolution and development in the human species is a very long way off.
* decency: 예의 ** inert: 비활성의
① evolution of human morality from a cultural perspective
② difficulties in studying the evolutionary process of genes
③ increasing necessity of educating children as moral agents
④ nature versus nurture controversies in developmental biology
⑤ complicated gene-environment interplay in moral development


24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Invasions of natural communities by non-indigenous species are currently rated as one of the most important global-scale environmental problems. The loss of biodiversity has generated concern over the consequences for ecosystem functioning and thus understanding the relationship between both has become a major focus in ecological research during the last two decades. The “biodiversity-invasibility hypothesis” by Elton suggests that high diversity increases the competitive environment of communities and makes them more difficult to invade. Numerous biodiversity experiments have been conducted since Elton’s time and several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the often observed negative relationship between diversity and invasibility. Beside the decreased chance of empty ecological niches but the increased probability of competitors that prevent invasion success, diverse communities are assumed to use resources more completely and, therefore, limit the ability of invaders to establish. Further, more diverse communities are believed to be more stable because they use a broader range of niches than species-poor communities.
* indigenous: 토착의 ** niche: 생태적 지위
① Carve Out More Empty Ecological Spaces!
② Guardian of Ecology: Diversity Resists Invasion
③ Grasp All, Lose All: Necessity of Species-poor Ecology
④ Challenges in Testing Biodiversity-Invasibility Hypothesis
⑤ Diversity Dilemma: The More Competitive, the Less Secure


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Green Tea Packaging Design Competition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?













　The above graph shows the world population access to electricity in 1997 and in 2017. ① The percentage of the total world population with electricity access in 2017 was 11 percentage points higher than that in 1997. ② Both in 1997 and in 2017, less than 80% of the rural population had access to electricity while over 90% of the urban population had access to electricity. ③ In 1997, 36% of the rural population did not have electricity access while 5% of the urban population did not have access to electricity. ④ The percentage of the rural population without electricity access in 2017 was 20 percentage points lower than that in 1997. ⑤ The percentage of the urban population without electricity access decreased from 5% in 1997 to 3% in 2017.






26. The Nuer에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The Nuer are one of the largest ethnic groups in South Sudan, primarily residing in the Nile River Valley. The Nuer are a cattle-raising people, whose everyday lives revolve around their cattle. They have various terms related to cattle,  so they can distinguish between hundreds of types of cows, based on color, markings, and shape of horns. They prefer to  be called by the names of the cattle they raise. The commonest daily foods for the Nuer are dairy products, especially milk for the young and soured milk, like yogurt, for adults. And wild fruits and nuts are favorite snacks for the Nuer. The Nuer also have a culture of counting only older members of the family. They believe that counting the number of children one has could result in misfortune and prefer to report fewer children than they have.
① 주로 Nile River Valley에 거주한다.
② 소와 관련된 다양한 용어를 가지고 있다.
③ 자신들이 기르는 소의 이름으로 불리는 것을 선호한다.
④ 가장 일반적인 일상 음식은 유제품이다.
⑤ 어린 자녀의 수를 세는 것이 행운을 가져온다고 믿는다.

Green Tea Packaging Design Competition
　Take the opportunity to design the packaging box for brand-new green tea products of TIIS Tea in the competition!
Deadline: December 2, 2019, 6:00 p.m. Participants: Lokota County residents only Details
?Our company name “TIIS Tea” should appear on the design.
?The competition theme is “Go Green with Green Tea.”
?Entries (JPG format only) should be submitted by email to designmanager@tiistea.com.
Evaluation Criteria
?Functionality	?Creativity	?Eco-friendliness
Awards
?1st place: $1,000	?2nd place: $500	?3rd place: $250 (The first-place winner’s signature will be printed on the packaging box.)
Please visit www.tiistea.com to learn more about the competition.

① 신제품 녹차를 위한 포장 상자 디자인 대회이다.
② Lokota County  주민들만 참가할 수 있다.
③ 출품작은 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
④ 평가 기준에 창의성이 포함된다.
⑤ 1등 수상자의 서명이 포장 상자에 인쇄될 것이다.


28. 2019 Badminton Challenge for Charity에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


2019 Badminton Challenge for Charity
　Join the charity tournament event hosted by Cliffield Community Center! This event supports Salke Children’s Hospital.
When & Where
?Saturday, November 23, 2:00 p.m.
?Cliffield Sports Center
How to Join the Tournament
?Make a two-member team.
?Pay your team’s $100 entry fee as a donation.
Activities
?Challenge last year’s champion team to a 3-point match.
?With an additional $20 donation, you can learn badminton skills from professional players.
※ Rackets and shuttlecocks will be provided.
  Click here to register now! 

① Salke Children’s Hospital이 주최한다.
② 3명이 한 팀을 구성해서 참가해야 한다.
③ 참가비는 한 사람당 100달러이다.
④ 20달러 추가 기부 시 배드민턴 기술을 배울 수 있다.
⑤ 라켓과 셔틀콕은 제공되지 않는다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Speculations about the meaning and purpose of prehistoric art ① rely heavily on analogies drawn with modern-day hunter-gatherer societies. Such primitive societies, ② as Steven Mithen emphasizes in The Prehistory of the Modern Mind, tend to view man and beast, animal and plant, organic and inorganic spheres, as participants in an integrated, animated totality. The dual expressions of this tendency are anthropomorphism (the practice of regarding animals as humans) and totemism (the practice of regarding humans as animals), both of ③ which spread through the visual art and the mythology of primitive cultures. Thus the natural world is conceptualized in terms of human social relations. When considered in this light, the visual preoccupation of early humans with the nonhuman creatures ④ inhabited their world becomes profoundly meaningful. Among hunter-gatherers, animals are not only good to eat, they are also good to think about, as Claude L?vi-Strauss has observed. In the practice of totemism, he has suggested, an unlettered humanity “broods upon ⑤ itself and its place in nature.”
* speculation: 고찰 ** analogy: 유사점
*** brood: 곰곰이 생각하다







30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Suppose we know that Paula suffers from a severe phobia. If we reason that Paula is afraid either of snakes or spiders, and then
① establish that she is not afraid of snakes, we will conclude that Paula is afraid of spiders. However, our conclusion is reasonable only if Paula’s fear really does concern either snakes or spiders. If we know only that Paula has a phobia, then the fact that she’s not afraid of snakes is entirely ② consistent with her being afraid of heights, water, dogs or the number thirteen. More generally, when we are presented with a list of alternative explanations for some phenomenon, and are then persuaded that all but one of those explanations are ③ unsatisfactory, we should pause to reflect. Before ④ denying that the remaining explanation is the correct one, consider whether other plausible options are being ignored or overlooked. The fallacy of false choice misleads when we’re insufficiently attentive to an important hidden assumption, that the choices which have been made explicit exhaust the ⑤ sensible alternatives.
* plausible: 그럴듯한 ** fallacy: 오류

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The role of science can sometimes be overstated, with its advocates slipping into scientism. Scientism is the view that  the scientific description of reality is the only truth there is. With the advance of science, there has been a tendency to slip into scientism, and assume that any factual claim can be authenticated if and only if the term ‘scientific’ can correctly be ascribed to it. The consequence is that non-scientific approaches to reality ― and that can include all the arts, religion, and personal, emotional and value-laden ways of encountering the world ― may become labelled as merely subjective,  and  therefore  of  little 	in terms of describing the way the world is. The philosophy of science seeks to avoid crude scientism and get a balanced view on  what the scientific method can and cannot achieve.
* ascribe: 속하는 것으로 생각하다 ** crude: 투박한
① question	② account	③ controversy
④ variation	⑤ bias
















32. The Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget frequently analyzed children’s conception of time via their ability to compare or estimate the time taken by pairs of events. In a typical experiment, two toy cars were shown running synchronously on parallel tracks, 	. The children were then asked to judge whether the cars had  run for the same time and to justify their judgment. Preschoolers and young school-age children confuse temporal and spatial dimensions: Starting times are judged by starting points, stopping times by stopping points and durations by distance, though each of these errors does not necessitate the others. Hence, a child may claim that the cars started and stopped running together (correct) and that the car which stopped further ahead, ran for more time (incorrect).
* synchronously: 같은 시간에
① one running faster and stopping further down the track
② both stopping at the same point further than expected
③ one keeping the same speed as the other to the end
④ both alternating their speed but arriving at the same end
⑤ both slowing their speed and reaching the identical spot


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. The future of our high-tech goods may lie not in the limitations of our minds, but in 	. In previous eras, such as the Iron Age and the Bronze Age, the discovery of new elements brought forth seemingly unending numbers of new inventions. Now the combinations may truly be unending. We are now witnessing a fundamental shift in our resource demands. At no point in human history have we used more elements, in more combinations, and in increasingly refined amounts. Our ingenuity will soon outpace our material supplies. This situation comes at a defining moment when the world is struggling to reduce its reliance on fossil fuels. Fortunately, rare metals are key ingredients in green technologies such as electric cars, wind turbines, and solar panels. They help to convert free natural resources like the sun and wind into the power that fuels our lives. But without increasing today’s limited supplies, we have no chance of developing the alternative green technologies we need to slow climate change. [3점]
* ingenuity: 창의력
① our ability to secure the ingredients to produce them
② our effort to make them as eco-friendly as possible
③ the wider distribution of innovative technologies
④ governmental policies not to limit resource supplies
⑤ the constant update and improvement of their functions









34. There have been many attempts to define what music is in terms of the specific attributes of musical sounds. The famous nineteenth-century critic Eduard Hanslick regarded ‘the measurable tone’ as ‘the primary and essential condition of all music’. Musical sounds, he was saying, can be distinguished from those of nature by the fact that they involve the use of fixed pitches, whereas virtually all natural sounds consist of constantly fluctuating frequencies. And a number of twentieth-century writers have assumed, like Hanslick, that fixed pitches are among the defining features of music. Now it is true that in most of the world’s musical cultures, pitches are
 	. However, this is a generalization about music and not a definition of it, for it is easy to put forward counter-examples. Japanese shakuhachi music and the sanjo music of Korea, for instance, fluctuate constantly around the notional pitches in terms of which the music is organized. [3점]
① not so much artificially fixed as naturally fluctuating
② not only fixed, but organized into a series of discrete steps
③ hardly considered a primary compositional element of music
④ highly diverse and complicated, and thus are immeasurable
⑤ a vehicle for carrying unique and various cultural features
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Although commonsense knowledge may have merit, it also has weaknesses, not the least of which is that it often contradicts itself. For example, we hear that people who are similar will like one another (“Birds of a feather flock together”) but also that persons who are dissimilar will like each other (“Opposites attract”). ① We are told that groups are wiser and smarter than individuals (“Two heads are better than one”) but also that group work inevitably produces poor results (“Too many cooks spoil the broth”). ② Each of these contradictory statements may hold true under particular conditions, but without a clear statement of when they apply and when they do not, aphorisms provide little insight into relations among people. ③ That is why we heavily depend on aphorisms whenever we face difficulties and challenges in the long journey of our lives. ④ They provide even less guidance in situations where we must make decisions.
⑤ For example, when facing a choice that entails risk, which guideline should we use ― “Nothing ventured, nothing gained” or “Better safe than sorry”?
* aphorism: 격언, 경구(警句)  ** entail: 수반하다


[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) The bad guys are usually punished; the romantic couple almost always find each other despite the obstacles and difficulties they encounter on the path to true love; and  the way we wish the world to be is how, in the movies, it more often than not winds up being. No doubt it is this utopian aspect of movies that accounts for why we enjoy them so much.
(B) The simple answer to this question is that movies do more than present two-hour civics lessons or editorials on responsible behavior. They also tell stories that,  in  the end, we find satisfying.
(C) But one may ask why audiences would find such movies enjoyable if all they do is give cultural directives and prescriptions for proper living. Most of us would likely grow tired of such didactic movies and would probably come to see them as propaganda, similar to the cultural artwork that was common in the Soviet Union and other autocratic societies.
* didactic: 교훈적인 ** autocratic: 독재적인
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) Some discoveries seem to entail numerous phases and discoverers, none of which can be identified as definitive. Furthermore, the evaluation of past discoveries and discoverers according to present-day standards does not allow us to see how significant they may have been  in their own day.
(B) This entailed relating the progressive accumulation of breakthroughs and discoveries. Only that which survived in some form in the present was considered relevant. In the mid-1950s, however, a number of faults in this view of history became apparent. Closer analysis of scientific discoveries, for instance, led historians to ask whether the dates of discoveries and their discoverers can be identified precisely.
(C) Nor does the traditional view recognise the role that non-intellectual factors, especially institutional and socio-economic ones, play in scientific developments. Most importantly, however, the traditional historian of science seems blind to the fact that the concepts, questions and standards that they use to frame the past are themselves subject to historical change. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
The fragmentation of television audiences during recent decades, which has happened throughout the globe as new channels have been launched everywhere, has caused advertisers much concern. ( ① ) Advertisers look back nostalgically to the years when a single spot transmission would be seen by the majority of the population at one fell swoop. ( ② ) This made the television advertising of mass consumer products relatively straightforward ― not to say easy ― whereas today it is necessary for advertisers to build up coverage of their target markets over time, by advertising on a host of channels with separate audiences. ( ③ ) Moreover, advertisers gain considerable benefits from the price competition between the numerous broadcasting stations. ( ④ ) And television remains much the fastest way to build up public awareness of a new brand or a new campaign. ( ⑤ ) Seldom does a new brand or new campaign that solely uses other media, without using television, reach high levels of public awareness very quickly. [3점]
* fragment: 조각내다  ** at one fell swoop: 단번에, 일거에

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Resident-bird habitat selection is seemingly a straightforward process in which a young dispersing individual moves until it finds a place where it can compete successfully to satisfy its needs. ( ① ) Initially, these needs include only food and  shelter. ( ② ) However, eventually, the young must locate, identify, and settle in a habitat that satisfies not only survivorship but reproductive needs as well. ( ③ ) In some cases, the  habitat that provides the best opportunity for survival may not be the same habitat as the one that provides for highest reproductive capacity because of requirements specific to the reproductive period. ( ④ ) Migrants, however, are free to choose the optimal habitat for survival during the nonbreeding season and for reproduction during the breeding season. ( ⑤ ) Thus, habitat selection during these different periods can be quite different for migrants as opposed to residents, even among closely related species.
* disperse: 흩어지다 ** optimal: 최적의










(A) (B)
① competitive …… disconnected
② tied	…… endangered
③ responsible …… isolated
④ competitive  …… united
⑤ tied	…… parted


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)















(C)
(D)










41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① “Hands-on” Activities as a Source of Creativity
② Activity-oriented Learning Enters Science Education!
③ Figure Out What Students Like Most in Science Class
④ Joy and Learning: More Effective When Separated
⑤ Turn “Minds-on” Learning On in Science Class


42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)





43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Marie가 운전하는 동안 Nina는 말이 없었다.
② Marie는 Nina의 오랜 친구이자 트레이너였다.
③ 폭포에서 Nina는 Marie에게 권투를 그만두겠다고 말했다.
④ 폭포에 있는 사람은 Marie와 Nina뿐이었다.
⑤ Nina는 폭포 위로 뛰어오르는 연어를 유심히 바라보았다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2018학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I don’t know which booth is better.
② Science is a difficult subject to master.
③ We have many unique booths this year.
④ I think it’s more creative than the other.
⑤ I’m afraid I’m not qualified to be a judge.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m sorry. I’ll make sure to do that.
② Let me get you something cold to drink.
③ Next time, I’ll check the expiration date.
④ Sure. I’ll help you move the refrigerator.
⑤ Drinking milk every day is a healthy habit.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 거리 축제가 연기된 이유를 설명하려고
② 거리 축제에 참가할 공연자를 모집하려고
③ 거리 축제를 위한 차량 통제를 공지하려고
④ 거리 축제 자원봉사자의 활동 시간을 안내하려고
⑤ 거리 축제에 주민 참여를 높일 방안을 제안하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사업가도 예술적 감수성을 갖추어야 한다.
② 한 분야에 집중하는 사람이 결국 성공한다.
③ 예술 활동이 스트레스 해소에 도움이 된다.
④ 학교에서 다양한 예술 프로그램을 제공해야 한다.
⑤ 창의성을 키우려면 다양한 분야의 경험이 필요하다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 독자 ? 동화 작가
② 영화배우 ? 만화가
③ 촬영감독 ? 시나리오 작가
④ 영화감독 ? 그래픽 디자이너
⑤ 토크 쇼 진행자 ? 소품 담당자

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 댄스 동작 만들어 주기	② 공연 포스터 붙여 주기
③ 소품 가져다 주기	④ 중국어 번역해 주기
⑤ 노래 반주해 주기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 파일을 수정하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 발표 주제가 명확하지 않아서
② 슬라이드의 수가 너무 많아서
③ 조원의 역할 소개가 누락되어서
④ 사용된 사진이 선명하지 않아서
⑤ 삽입된 동영상이 재생되지 않아서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $220	② $280	③ $290	④ $310	⑤ $410


10.대화를  듣고,  Green  River  Cave  Tour에  관해  언급되지  않은 것을 고르시오.
① 소요 시간	② 참가비
③ 최소 출발 인원	④ 안전 장비 임대료
⑤ 반려견 동반 가능 여부


1.What’s In My Bag Video Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 가방 속 물건에 관한 이야기를 담은 동영상 대회이다.
② 18세에서 28세 사이의 누구나 참가할 수 있다.
③ 참가작의 길이는 1분에서 4분 사이여야 한다.
④ 제출 마감 시간은 4월 10일 오후 6시이다.
⑤ 최상위 20편의 창작자들은 상금을 받는다.




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 무선 스피커를
고르시오.

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Wireless Speakers

①
②
③
④
⑤


13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Certainly. Just pick them up and enjoy the freshness.
② No. An additional fee is charged for a quick delivery.
③ We are sorry. We’ll take the eggs back immediately.
④ Don’t worry. We have the best refrigeration system.
⑤ Okay. Eggs will be delivered to your new address.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Be careful! The water is flowing out of the pot.
② I think so. Greens create a peaceful environment.
③ Right. An indoor garden raises in­house humidity.
④ Not really. Too much fertilizer can kill your plant.
⑤ Exactly. The soil will tell you when to water your plant.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  David가  Olivia에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오.
David:  	
① What about using a trial service for the model?
② Should we renew our rental service contract now?
③ It seems that this model is too big for our house.
④ I heard this model received good customer reviews.
⑤ This product breaks down easily, so I don’t want it.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① popularity of eco­friendly lab equipment
② necessity of wearing protective lab gear
③ proper maintenance of lab equipment after use
④ importance of setting up a detailed experiment plan
⑤ danger of conducting experiments without supervision

17.언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① lab boots	② lab coats	③ rubber gloves
④ hair caps	⑤ face masks






① 웹 사이트를 통한 과제 제출을 독려하려고
② 결석생 지도를 위한 웹 사이트를 홍보하려고
③ 결석 사유에 따른 출결 처리에 관해 설명하려고
④ 결석생에 대한 보충 지도 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 학생 안전 보험에 가입할 것을 권유하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 Richard의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There was a flash of movement in the window. Richard slowly began to step backwards. Quickly he opened the closet and went inside closing the door behind him. Heavy footsteps began to advance towards the room. Richard’s throat was dry, and his mind was racing out of control. Staring out into the room, Richard felt his heart pounding harder than it had ever pounded before. There now standing in the room, the same room Richard was in, was a man so hideous; it took his breath away. Suddenly the man began sniffing around the room. Richard knew he was about to be discovered. His heart began to pound faster.
① anxious and frightened	② proud and delighted
③ regretful and ashamed	④ bored and lonely
⑤ relieved and satisfied

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　What is your goal in writing a particular paper or giving a talk or doing a poster? You should be able to state this goal in one sentence. For example, one of Bob’s first papers as a psychology student was written to show that individual differences in children’s intelligence could not be explained by genetic factors alone. Sure, he reviewed the literature on inheritance of intelligence. And of course he reviewed the literature on environmental effects on intelligence. But he had no thesis. Good papers do not merely review literature and then say something like “there are many different points of view, all of which have something useful to say.” When you communicate via a paper, talk, or poster, be clear about what you want to show, and show it.
① 유전과 환경 요인을 반영하여 지능을 정의해야 한다.
② 논문을 쓰기 전에 문헌 연구를 충실히 해야 한다.
③ 매체의 특성에 맞는 홍보 전략을 세워야 한다.
④ 지나치게 광범위한 연구 주제를 피해야 한다.
⑤ 전달하려는 논지를 명확하게 밝혀야 한다.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Plant and animal species are so diverse that the old saying “beauty is in the eye of the beholder” could be the perfect slogan for nature’s bounty. It’s easy for most people to see the breathtaking beauty found in the brightly colored wings of butterflies, a field of blooming wildflowers, or a forest of hardwood trees in their autumn glory. But what about snails and their trails of slime, rats with yellow teeth, or spiders that look like fierce aliens? These species are beautiful in their own right ? just not in a traditional sense. Recognition of their unique beauty may require setting aside any preconceptions ? or misconceptions ? people may have about fungi, insects, or reptiles. People seem to be hardwired to see warm and fuzzy mammals as cute, while often lacking this innate and immediate attraction to the cold­blooded, eight­legged, or egg­laying members of the animal kingdom. Yet beauty is in no short supply among these animals.
* bounty: 풍요로움 ** slime: (끈끈한) 점액
① 편견을 버리면 모든 생물의 고유한 아름다움을 볼 수 있다.
② 보호할 생물 종을 선정할 때 객관적인 기준이 필요하다.
③ 자연과의 상호 작용을 통해 미적 감각을 기를 수 있다.
④ 특정 생물 종에 대한 선호는 인간 진화의 산물이다.
⑤ 자연 모방 기술은 다양한 분야에 활용될 수 있다.





2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　During the last two decades many developing countries have joined the global tourism market as part of globalization processes and the fall of the Iron Curtain. These countries had suffered from negative public and media image which made it challenging for them to compete over tourists with countries with strong and familiar brands. In this global era, a problematic image is a major obstacle in attracting tourists, high­quality residents and investors. However, in the case of destinations suffering from prolonged image crises, it seems almost unrealistic to expect any target audience to visit a destination and “put aside” these long­lasting negative images and stereotypes, just because of an advertising campaign or other promotional effort. Tackling prolonged negative place images is crucial for developing tourism in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Eastern Europe and Asia. Although these destinations differ greatly, in the eyes of many potential tourists they all suffer from weak place images, negative stereotypes and problematic perceptions.
① growing conflicts between tourists and local people
② roles of media in shaping the global trend in tourism
③ necessity of global cooperation for sustainable tourism
④ importance of the tourism industry in national economy
⑤ developing nations’ need to improve destination images

23.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　With the general accessibility of photocopiers in student libraries, students tend to copy the relevant material for later use. In such cases the students are not always selective about what they copy. Often useless material is gathered that may seem important at the time but does not seem so in their study room on the night before an exam or essay due date. In addition, when most people photocopy material from books, they feel as if they have actually accomplished something. After all, a few photocopied pages in their notebook now represent information that used to be in a big, thick book. The reality of the situation is that nothing significant has been accomplished yet. The student only has the information in a transportable form. He or she has not learned anything from the material. The information content of the photocopied sheets is just as foreign as if it had been left on the library shelf.
① Information Accessibility Leads to Intellectual Advances
② Reasons You Should Keep Study Material After Exams
③ Photocopied Material: Not a Sign of Accomplishment
④ Careless Photocopying May Be Considered a Crime
⑤ Photocopier: A Contributor to Information Spread


24.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The above graph shows how the United States managed solid waste compared to five European nations in 2011. ① The United States had lower percentages of “Recycling or composting” and “Energy from waste,” and a higher percentage of “Landfilled” than the five European nations. ② Burying solid waste in landfills was the most commonly used solid waste management technique in the United States, accounting for 69 percent of total solid waste disposal. ③ On the other hand, “Landfilled” took up zero (or statistically insignificant) percent in Germany, the Netherlands and Austria, and just 1 percent in Belgium and Sweden respectively. ④ Among the five European nations, Austria recorded the lowest percentage of “Energy from waste,” which was more than five times that of the United States. ⑤ The United States recycled or composted about a quarter of its total solid waste, but Sweden recycled or composted half of its total solid waste.
* composting: 퇴비화




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

25. Jacqueline Cochran에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
　Jacqueline Cochran was raised by foster parents in a poor town in Florida. When she was about eight years old, the family moved to Columbus, Georgia, where she worked 12 hours a day in a factory. Her formal education lasted only two years; she learned to read and write on her own. In 1932 she met her future husband, Floyd Odlum, who encouraged her to learn to fly. Cochran loved flying and participated in many air races. Before World War II, she volunteered her services to the Royal Air Force. She recruited qualified women pilots in the United States and took them to England where they joined the air force. After the war, Cochran set more than 200 flight records in her career. In 1953, she became the first woman pilot to break the sound barrier. Additionally, she was the first female to pilot a jet across the Atlantic.
① Columbus에 있는 공장에서 하루 12시간 동안 일했다.
② 정규 교육을 2년 받았고 읽기와 쓰기는 스스로 깨우쳤다.
③ 비행기 조종을 배우라는 격려를 Floyd Odlum에게 받았다.
④ 영국에서 여성 조종사를 모집하여 미국으로 데려갔다.
⑤ 제트기를 조종하여 대서양을 횡단한 최초의 여성이었다.



26. Author Visit & Book Signing Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
27. 
Surf and Tutor Sessions에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하는 것은?



① 학과 교습 시간이 서핑 교습 시간보다 길다.
② 학습 도구는 신청자가 별도 지참해야 한다.
③ 학과 교습이 가능한 과목은 수학, 과학, 스페인어이다.
④ 서핑 교습 후 학과 교습을 받는다.
⑤ 서핑 교습과 학과 교습 중 하나만 받을 수도 있다.



















① 작가가 자신의 작품 일부를 낭독한다.
② 4월 6일에 1시간 30분 동안 진행된다.
③ 50분 동안 작가가 책에 사인해 주는 시간이 있다.
④ 작가의 책을 현장에서 구입해 사인을 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 좌석이 제한되어 있어 사전 등록이 필요하다.

28.다음  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지  않은
것은? [3점]
　The repairman is called in when the ① smooth operation of our world has been disrupted, and at such moments our dependence on things normally taken for granted (for example, a toilet that flushes) is brought to vivid awareness. For this very reason, the repairman’s ② presence may make the narcissist uncomfortable. The problem isn’t so much that he is dirty or the job is messy. Rather, he seems to pose a
③ challenge to our self­understanding that is somehow fundamental. We’re not as free and independent as we thought. Street­level work that disrupts the infrastructure (the sewer system below or the electrical grid above) brings our shared ④ isolation into view. People may inhabit very different worlds even in the same city, according to their wealth or poverty. Yet we all live in the same physical reality, ultimately, and owe a ⑤ common debt to the world.
* narcissist: 자아도취자 ** electrical grid: 전력망




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.(A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모  안에서 어법에  맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은?
The old maxim “I’ll sleep when I’m dead” is unfortunate.
(A) Adopt / Adopting		this mind­set, and you will be dead sooner and the quality of that life will be worse. The elastic band of sleep deprivation can stretch only so far before it snaps. Sadly, human beings are in fact the only species that will deliberately deprive (B) them / themselves of	sleep		without	legitimate		gain.	Every	component	of wellness, and countless seams of societal fabric, are being eroded by our costly state of sleep neglect: human and financial	alike.	So		much	so	that		the	World	Health

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. It is important to note that the primary goal of the professional athlete as well as many adults ? winning ? is far less important to children. In one of our own studies, we found that teams’ won­lost records had nothing to do with
how much young athletes liked their coaches or with their desire to play for the same coaches again. Interestingly, however, success of the team was related to how much the children thought their parents liked their coaches. The children also felt that the won­lost record influenced how much their coaches liked them. It appears that, even at very young    ages,    children    begin    to    tune    in    to the

Organization (WHO) has now declared a sleep loss epidemic	 	on winning, even though they do not

throughout industrialized nations. It is no coincidence that countries (C) where / which sleep time has declined most dramatically over the past century, such as the US, the UK, Japan, and South Korea, and several in Western Europe, are also those suffering the greatest increase in rates of physical diseases and mental disorders.
(A) (B)	(C)
① Adopt     ······  them	······  where
② Adopt     ······  themselves  ······   where
③ Adopt     ······  themselves  ······   which
④ Adopting  ······  themselves  ······ which
⑤ Adopting  ······  them	······  which













30.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Jack closed his eyes and took a deep breath. Then Dr. Davis showed up and plugged in his saw. Jack didn’t know if he was curious or just scared, but ① he had to watch as the blade spun toward his arm. The high­pitched scream filled the small room and bounced off the cement block walls. ② He flinched to cover his ears, but Dr. Davis said, “Jack, hold still now. This’ll only take a minute.” Plaster dust sprayed up like a rooster tail as the saw sank into ③ his cast. He ignored the dust flying and stared without blinking while Dr. Davis moved the blade up and down ④ his arm, cutting deeper and deeper until the tension of the cast released. Slowly and skillfully, Dr. Davis moved the blade close to Jack’s pale skin as ⑤ he cut the last bits of fiber that still held. Finally, the cast popped apart. Jack’s flattened arm hairs tried to stand on end as air rushed around them for the first time in weeks.
* flinch: 움찔하다

yet share it themselves. What children do share is a desire to have fun!
① peer pressure
② adult emphasis
③ critical research
④ financial reliance
⑤ teamwork influence













32. Sculpture in a public place is the emotional and aesthetic focal point of the elements in the surrounding environment. Any environment is unique with the diversity of its component elements, the connections between them and their appearance as a complete structure. This preliminary structural analysis and acquaintance with the site chosen for
the sculpture is compulsory before working on its design; it is a requirement for 	. The proper understanding of the spatial characteristics of the elements, making up the whole multitude, as well as of the structural links between the constituent elements of this specific microcosm are preconditions for satisfactory design and an adequate sculptural solution. Contrary to the mechanical adding of one more element to the multitude, it is better to “weave” something more into the context of the existing structure. [3점]
* preliminary: 예비의 ** microcosm: 작은 세계
① successful integration in the specific space
② applying mechanical theories to architecture
③ true understanding of the human psychology
④ exact evaluation of the property’s future value
⑤ creating a commercial space for multiple purposes




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3.Typically an individual cannot accurately assess the gains
and costs likely to occur in social interactions. Even the intrinsic satisfactions associated with the individual’s own behaviors may turn sour if the other person somehow does the wrong thing. For example, a person may derive intrinsic satisfaction from helping others; so if the recipient reciprocates favor for favor, both intrinsic and extrinsic satisfaction derive from the profitable interaction. However, the recipient may ignore or even resent the good­intended gesture as patronizing and may verbally abuse the favor doer, thereby increasing the costs, perhaps spoiling the intrinsic satisfaction (gain) of the behavior, and hence leaving the favor doer with a net loss for the interaction. The consequences of interaction can be difficult to foresee because they 	. [3점]
* reciprocate: 보답하다 ** patronizing: 생색내는
① minimize the ambiguity of the verbal message
② are subject to academic backgrounds of both parties
③ depend as much on the behavior of others as on oneself
④ are affected more easily by compliments than criticism
⑤ may imply one’s gain at the cost of the other’s loss











34. Audiences appreciate aha moments so much that they also enjoy simply expecting them, even if the  moment  never comes. Somebody can enjoy a long book or television show
that offers no answer for hours and hours if the genre itself promises a resolution. When the popular, mystic television show Lost ended, many fans erupted in indignation that the showrunners failed to resolve the series’ many puzzles. This deprived careful viewers of the final aha moment that they thought they’d been promised. Some people surely felt like they’d wasted weeks, even months, of their lives waiting for answers. But their final disappointment didn’t retroactively change the sincere thrill they’d felt throughout the series. Lost was a monster hit for many years because
 	, even though the writers were just stockpiling riddles without resolutions. Many people will put themselves through quite a bit of anguish if they expect fluent resolution at the end. [3점]
* indignation: 분개 ** retroactively: 시간을 거슬러
① the drama in the show revealed pieces of reality
② each episode had a narrative structure of its own
③ producers adopted the viewers’ opinion on their show
④ audiences enjoyed the experience of anticipating answers
⑤ the abrupt ending of the show was hinted to the viewers

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Reading is a technology for perspective­taking. When someone else’s thoughts are in your head, you are observing the world from that person’s vantage point. ① Not only are you taking in sights and sounds that you could not experience firsthand, but you have stepped inside that person’s mind and are temporarily sharing his or her attitudes and reactions. ② Empathy in the sense of adopting someone’s viewpoint is not the same as  empathy  in  the sense of feeling compassion toward the person, but the first can lead to the second by a natural route. ③ Stepping into someone else’s vantage point reminds you that the other fellow has a first­person, present­tense, ongoing stream of consciousness that is very much like your own but not the same as your own. ④ Reading is a good habit because it helps you to shape your character and boosts your confidence and personality. ⑤ It’s not a big leap to suppose that the habit of reading other people’s words could put one in the habit of entering other people’s minds, including their pleasures and pains.
* vantage point: 관점







[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) However, some people argue that the opposite is also true. In order to achieve high building density, massive high­rise buildings are inevitable, and these massive structures, crammed into small sites, can conversely result in very little open space and a congested cityscape.
(B) High building density, therefore, helps to reduce the pressure to develop open spaces and releases more land for communal facilities and services to improve the quality of urban living.
(C) This may happen when high­density development is carried out without planning. Therefore, in order to avoid the negative impacts of high density, thorough planning and appropriate density control are essential.
* cram: 밀어 넣다
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(A) Behaviors which are successful have persisted in the form of customs, while those which are unsuccessful have suffered extinction. This accumulation of adaptive habits is passed on to the child; he does not simply learn through imitation how to get along in the world; rather, he is enculturated.
(B) It may be added that in any society an individual learns only a small portion of his cultural habits by free trial­and­error, for in this way he would learn only those habits which were most rewarding to him and to him alone.
(C) Such indiscriminate and selfish learning cannot be allowed by society; the individual must learn behavior which is specified in the culture as being correct or best. Such behavior is, of course, the result of the learning process as carried on by previous generations. [3점]
* enculturate: 문화에 적응시키다 ** indiscriminate: 마구잡이의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가 장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　In today’s digital environment, appearing in the mainstream news is still an important way citizens can communicate with a broader community about events and issues. ( ① ) Journalists can provide credibility, status, and a guaranteed large audience that many citizens do not feel they can get any other way. ( ② ) However, to access those benefits, subjects must yield control to journalists over how their stories are told to the public. ( ③ ) That is a big risk, since news stories have a great deal of credibility with their audiences: whether subjects themselves feel the news coverage is accurate or not, they will have to deal with the consequences of many people believing it. ( ④ ) If news coverage portrays them as socially deviant or otherwise morally unfit, the resulting stigma can be profound and enduring. ( ⑤ ) The benefits of addressing, or simply displaying oneself to, a large news audience can be so great that many subjects conclude they are worth the risks of being misrepresented. [3점]
* subject: 취재 대상 ** deviant: 일탈한 *** stigma: 오명


40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Recovering from a series of early failures, Edison regained his reputation as a great inventor, and electric wiring in the home gained wide acceptance. ( ① ) It wasn’t that people necessarily became less fearful of electricity, but rather, as they became more familiar with it, they began to believe that the risks could be managed with some safety precautions. ( ② ) People began to accept the trade­off of the risk of accidental death from electricity for better and cheaper lighting and work­saving electrical appliances. ( ③ ) They simultaneously experienced a lower risk of candle and gaslight fires. ( ④ ) This made­up claim was seen by the public as the scare tactic that it was, and they were unmoved. ( ⑤ ) Gas lighting in homes soon disappeared, and the death rate from house fires decreased accordingly.




?



(A) (B)
① temperature	······	chemistry
② level	······	pressure
③ temperature	······	circulation
④ level	······	circulation
⑤ color	······	chemistry



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
　Grandma hesitated. “I’ll give you a dime for them,” her neighbor continued. Grandma hesitated just a moment longer. She hated to part with her flowers, but a dime was a dime and (c) she needed the money. “You can’t transplant them now,” Grandma explained. “Not until after they quit blooming.” “I know,” the woman replied. Then she held out the dime. “Oh, you can pay me when (d) you come to get them,” Grandma said. “No,” said the neighbor, “I’d better pay you now.” So Grandma took the dime and thanked her, trying to still the regret rising in her heart.

(D)











41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Want to Get More Done? Work More Slowly
② Social Interaction: A Booster of Performance
③ Human Relationships Can Be a Cause of Stress
④ Successful Management Relies on Power Distribution
⑤ High Productivity: Not an Indicator of Job Satisfaction

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① team­based	② long­term	③ noise­free
④ time­limited	⑤ leader­initiated

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Grandma는 채소밭 가장자리의 붓꽃들을 ‘flags’라고 불렀다.
② Grandma는 이웃에게 구근을 캐내 가라고 말하기로 했다.
③ 꽃을 팔라는 이웃의 제안에 Grandma는 대답을 망설였다.
④ Grandma는 이웃에게 꽃을 바로 옮겨 심을 수 있다고 말했다.
⑤ 이웃은 꽃을 가져가지 않은 이유를 자기 딸에게 말했다.



	


2022학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 댄스 동아리 가입 조건을 안내하려고
② 동아리 개설 신청 기간을 홍보하려고
③ 동아리 만족도 설문 조사 참여를 당부하려고
④ 댄스 동아리 활동 장소 폐쇄 이유를 설명하려고
⑤ 댄스 동아리 회원 모집 인원 증원을 공지하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 불필요한 쓰레기를 줄이기 위해 과도한 포장을 지양해야 한다.
② 환경 보호를 위해 쓰레기 분리배출을 철저히 해야 한다.
③ 선물을 고를 때는 받는 사람의 취향을 고려해야 한다.
④ 사용 빈도가 높지 않은 물건은 상자에 보관해야 한다.
⑤ 선물 종류에 따라 포장 방법을 달리해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 잡지 기자 － 시나리오 작가	② 아나운서 － 작사가
③ 라디오 진행자 － 음악 평론가	④ 영화감독 － 배우
⑤ 신문 기자 － 모델

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 경제학 과제 자료 조사하기	② 자원봉사 신청서 제출하기
③ 환경 캠페인 포스터 만들기	④ 학생회관 가는 길 알려 주기
⑤ 마라톤 코스 답사하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $30	② $36	③ $40	④ $45	⑤ $50







7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 컴퓨터 프로그래밍 강좌를 신청하지 않은 이유를 고르시오.
① 수업이 30분 일찍 시작되어서
② 다른 도시로 이사를 가게 되어서
③ 컴퓨터 프로그래밍에 흥미를 잃어서
④ 퇴근 후에 수업 듣는 것이 너무 피곤해서
⑤ 컴퓨터 프로그래밍이 자신의 경력과 무관해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Samuel’s Woodworking Class에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 시간	③ 복장
④ 등록비	⑤ 모집 인원

9. 2021  Lakeside  Essay  Contest에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 주제는 여름으로부터의 메시지이다.
② Lakeside High School  전교생이 참가할 수 있다.
③ 에세이 분량은 3페이지를 넘으면 안 된다.
④ 제출 마감은 다음 주 금요일이다.
⑤ 상위 10편의 에세이는 학교 웹 사이트에 게시될 예정이다.

10. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고, 남자가  주문할  자전거를 고르시오.
Bicycles for Commuters

①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. Let me call him now.
② Not at all. My hair is really long.
③ Yes. I really like my new hairstyle.
④ Why not? I’ll text the number to you.
⑤ Not really. I don’t need to check your schedule.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Fine. I’ll look for another band.
② Great! You can be our drummer.
③ Sorry. I can’t offer you the position.
④ Really? It’ll be great to play in your band.
⑤ What a surprise! I didn’t know you play drums.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① No problem. You’ll get your refund.
② Of course. That’s why I canceled my order.
③ Excellent. I’ll exchange it with a bigger size.
④ Good. I’m glad to hear you received the package.
⑤ Okay. We’ll send the gray skirt to you right away.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① All right. I’ll check if it’s in the jacket and call you back.
② Don’t worry. I’ll visit the lost and found for you.
③ Too bad. Let me have my credit card replaced.
④ I see. I’ll buy a new jacket if you can’t find it.
⑤ Thank you. Pick me up at the grocery store.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Rachel이 Kevin에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Rachel:   	
① Is it necessary to exercise every day?
② Why don’t you work out at the closer one?
③ I recommend the one with good  facilities.
④ You should choose the one within your budget.
⑤ What about looking for a better place to work at?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① decline in employment opportunities due to drones
② regulations for using drones in various fields
③ job skills necessary for drone development
④ workplace accidents caused by drone use
⑤ various uses of drones in different jobs


17. 언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
① farmers	② photographers	③ soldiers
④ police officers	⑤ firefighters






18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Ms. Larson,
　I am writing to you with new information about your current membership. Last year, you signed up for our museum membership that provides special discounts. As stated in the last newsletter, this year we are happy to be celebrating our 50th anniversary. So we would like to offer you further benefits. These include free admission for up to ten people and 20% off museum merchandise on your next visit. You will also be invited to all new exhibition openings this year at discounted prices. We hope you enjoy these offers. For any questions, please feel free to contact us.
Best regards, Stella Harrison
① 박물관 개관 50주년 기념행사 취소를 공지하려고
② 작년에 가입한 박물관 멤버십의 갱신을 요청하려고
③ 박물관 멤버십 회원을 위한 추가 혜택을 알려 주려고
④ 박물관 기념품점에서 새로 판매할 상품을 홍보하려고
⑤ 박물관 전시 프로그램에서 변경된 내용을 안내하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Natalie의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? As Natalie was logging in to her first online counseling session,  she  wondered,  “How  can  I  open  my  heart  to  the
counselor through a computer screen?” Since the counseling
center was a long drive away, she knew that this would save her a lot of time. Natalie just wasn’t sure if it would be as helpful as meeting her counselor in person. Once the session began, however, her concerns went away. She actually started thinking that it was much more convenient than expected. She felt as if the counselor were in the room with her. As the session closed, she told him with a smile, “I’ll definitely see you online again!”
① doubtful   → satisfied	② regretful → confused
③ confident → ashamed	④ bored → excited
⑤ thrilled → disappointed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　New ideas, such as those inspired by scientific developments, are often aired and critiqued in our popular culture as part of a healthy process of public debate, and scientists sometimes deserve the criticism they get. But the popularization of science would be greatly enhanced by improving the widespread images of the scientist. Part of the problem may be that the majority of the people who are most likely to write novels, plays, and film scripts were educated in the humanities, not in the sciences. Furthermore, the few scientists-turned-writers have used their scientific training as the source material for thrillers that further damage the image of science and scientists. We need more screenplays and novels that present scientists in a positive light. In our contemporary world, television and film are particularly influential media, and it is likely that the introduction of more scientist-heroes would help to make science more attractive.
① 과학의 대중화를 위해 여러 매체에서 과학자를 긍정적으로 묘사해야 한다.
② 작가로 전업한 과학자는 전공 지식을 작품에 사실적으로 반영해야 한다.
③ 공상 과학 작가로 성공하려면 과학과 인문학을 깊이 이해해야 한다.
④ 과학의 저변 확대를 위해 영화 주인공으로 과학자가 등장해야 한다.
⑤ 과학 정책 논의에 과학자뿐만 아니라 인문학자도 참여해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 an empty inbox가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The single most important change you can make in your working habits is to switch to creative work first, reactive work second. This means blocking off a large chunk of time every day for creative work on your own priorities, with the phone and e-mail off. I used to be a frustrated writer. Making this switch turned me into a productive writer. Yet there wasn’t a single day when I sat down to write an article, blog post, or book chapter without a string of people waiting for me to get back to them. It wasn’t easy, and it still isn’t, particularly when I get phone messages beginning “I sent you an e-mail two hours ago...!” By definition, this approach goes against the grain of others’ expectations and the pressures they put on you. It takes willpower to switch off the world, even for an hour. It feels uncomfortable, and sometimes people get upset. But it’s better to disappoint a few people over small things, than to abandon your dreams for an empty inbox. Otherwise, you’re sacrificing your potential for the illusion of professionalism.
① following an innovative course of action
② attempting to satisfy other people’s demands
③ completing challenging work without mistakes
④ removing social ties to maintain a mental balance
⑤ securing enough opportunities for social networking



22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Contractors that will construct a project may place more weight on the planning process. Proper planning forces detailed thinking about the project. It allows the project manager (or team) to “build the project in his or her head.” The project manager (or team) can consider different methodologies thereby deciding what works best or what does not work at all. This detailed thinking may be the only way to discover restrictions or risks that were not addressed in the estimating process. It would be far better to discover in the planning phase that a particular technology or material will not work than in the execution process. The goal of the planning process for the contractor is to produce a workable scheme that uses the resources efficiently within the allowable time and given budget. A well-developed plan does not guarantee that the executing process will proceed flawlessly or that the project will even succeed in meeting its objectives. It does, however, greatly improve its chances.
* execute: 실행하다
① 계획 수립 절차를 간소화하면 일의 진행 속도가 빨라진다.
② 안정적인 예산 확보는 일의 원활한 진행을 위해 필수적이다.
③ 사업 계획은 급변하는 상황에 따라 유연하게 변경될 수 있다.
④ 면밀한 계획 수립은 일의 효율성을 증대시키고 성공 가능성을 높인다.
⑤ 대규모 사업에서는 지속적인 성장을 목표로 하는 세부 계획이 중요하다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Children can move effortlessly between play and absorption in a story, as if both are forms of the same activity. The taking of roles in a narratively structured game of pirates is not very different than the taking of roles in identifying with characters as one watches a movie. It might be thought that, as they grow towards adolescence, people give up childhood play, but this is not so. Instead, the bases and interests of this activity change and develop to playing and watching sports, to the fiction of plays, novels, and movies, and nowadays to video games. In fiction, one can enter possible worlds. When we experience emotions in such worlds, this is not a sign that we are being incoherent or regressed. It derives from trying out metaphorical transformations of our selves in new ways, in new worlds, in ways that can be moving and important to us.
* pirate: 해적 ** incoherent: 일관되지 않은
① relationship between play types and emotional stability
② reasons for identifying with imaginary characters in childhood
③ ways of helping adolescents develop good reading habits
④ continued engagement in altered forms of play after childhood
⑤ effects of narrative structures on readers’ imaginations







24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Although cognitive and neuropsychological approaches emphasize the losses with age that might impair social perception, motivational theories indicate that there may be some gains or qualitative changes. Charles and Carstensen review a considerable body of evidence indicating that, as people get older, they tend to prioritize close social relationships, focus more on achieving emotional well-being, and attend more to positive emotional information while ignoring negative information. These changing motivational goals in old age  have implications for attention to and processing of social cues from the environment. Of particular importance in considering emotional changes in old age is the presence of a positivity bias: that is, a tendency to notice, attend to, and remember more positive compared to negative information. The role of life experience in social skills also indicates that older adults might show gains in some aspects of social perception.
* cognitive: 인식의 ** impair: 해치다
① Social Perception in Old Age: It’s Not All Bad News!
② Blocking Out the Negative Sharpens Social Skills
③ Lessons on Life-long Goals from Senior Achievers
④ Getting Old: A Road to Maturity and Objectivity
⑤ Positive Mind and Behavior: Tips for Reversing Aging


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Wing Cheese Factory Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?














　The above graph, which was based on a survey conducted in 2019, shows the percentages of U.S. adults by age group who said they had read (or listened to) a book in one or more of the formats ― print books, e-books, and audiobooks ― in the previous 12 months. ① The percentage of people in the 18-29 group who said they had read a print book was 74%, which  was the highest among the four groups. ② The percentage of people who said they had read a print book in the 50-64 group was higher than that in the 65 and up group. ③ While 34% of people in the 18-29 group said they had read an e-book, the percentage of people who said so was below 20% in the 65 and up group. ④ In all age groups, the percentage of people who said they had read an e-book was higher than that of people who said they had listened to an audiobook. ⑤ Among the four age groups, the 30-49 group had the highest percentage of people who said they had listened to an audiobook.



26. Emil Z?topek에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Emil Z?topek, a former Czech athlete, is considered one of the greatest long-distance runners ever. He was also famous for his distinctive running style. While working in a shoe
factory, he participated in a 1,500-meter race and won second place. After that event, he took a more serious interest in running and devoted himself to it. At the 1952 Olympic Games in Helsinki, he won three gold medals in the 5,000-meter and 10,000-meter races and in the marathon, breaking Olympic records in each. He was married to Dana Z?topkov?, who was an Olympic gold medalist, too. Z?topek was also noted for his friendly personality. In 1966, Z?topek invited Ron Clarke, a great Australian runner who had never won an Olympic gold medal, to an athletic meeting in Prague. After the meeting, he gave Clarke one of his gold medals as a gift.
① 독특한 달리기 스타일로 유명했다.
② 신발 공장에서 일한 적이 있다.
③ 1952년 Helsinki  올림픽에서 올림픽 기록을 깨지 못했다.
④ 올림픽 금메달리스트인 Dana Z?topkov?와 결혼했다.
⑤ 자신의 금메달 중 하나를 Ron Clarke에게 주었다.
　
Attention, all cheese lovers! Come and experience our historic cheese-making process at the Wing Cheese Factory. Look around, taste, and make!
Participation
?Adults: $30, Children: $10 (Ages 3 and under: Free)
?The fee includes cheese tasting and making.
?Sign up for the tour at www.cheesewcf.com by June 30.
Tour Schedule
?10:00 a.m.: Watch a video about the factory’s history
?10:30 a.m.: Factory tour and cheese tasting
?11:30 a.m.: Cheese making
Note
?Participants can buy a cheese-shaped key chain for $15.
?No photography is allowed inside the factory.
?We are closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

① 참가비에는 치즈 만들기 비용이 포함된다.
② 참가 신청은 6월 30일까지 해야 한다.
③ 공장의 역사에 대한 비디오를 보는 일정이 있다.
④ 참가자는 치즈 모양의 열쇠고리를 15달러에 살 수 있다.
⑤ 공장 안에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.



28. Treehouse Drive-in Movie Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Treehouse Drive-in Movie Night
　Looking for a fun night out with the family? Come with your loved ones and enjoy our first drive-in movie night of 2021! All money from ticket sales will be donated to the local children’s hospital.
Featured Film: Dream Story
Date: June 13, 2021
Place: Treehouse Parking Lot
Showtimes
?First Screening: 7:30 p.m.
?Second Screening: 10:00 p.m.
Tickets: $30 per car
Additional Information
?50 parking spots are available (The gate opens at 6 p.m.).
?Ice cream and hot dogs are sold on site.
?Make your reservation online at www.tdimn.com.

① 2021년에 두 번째로 열리는 행사이다.
② 티켓 판매 수입금 전액은 어린이 도서관에 기부될 것이다.
③ 첫 번째 상영 시작 시간은 오후 10시이다.
④ 티켓 가격은 자동차 한 대당 50달러이다.
⑤ 아이스크림과 핫도그가 현장에서 판매된다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Most historians of science point to the need for a reliable calendar to regulate agricultural activity as the motivation for learning about what we now call astronomy, the study of stars and planets. Early astronomy provided information about when to plant crops and gave humans ① their first formal method of recording the passage of time. Stonehenge, the 4,000-year-old ring of stones in southern Britain, ② is perhaps the best-known monument to the discovery of regularity and predictability in the world we inhabit. The great markers of Stonehenge point to the spots on the horizon ③ where the sun rises at the solstices and equinoxes ― the dates we still use to mark the beginnings of the seasons. The stones may even have ④ been used to predict eclipses. The existence of Stonehenge, built by people without writing, bears silent testimony both to the regularity of nature and to the ability of the human mind to see behind immediate appearances and ⑤ discovers deeper meanings in events.
* monument: 기념비 ** eclipse: (해 달의) 식(蝕)
*** testimony: 증언







30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Sport can trigger an emotional response in its consumers of the kind rarely brought forth by other products. Imagine bank customers buying memorabilia to show loyalty to their bank, or consumers ① identifying so strongly with their car insurance company that they get a tattoo with its logo. We know that some sport followers are so ② passionate about players, teams and the sport itself that their interest borders on obsession. This addiction provides the emotional glue that binds fans to teams, and maintains loyalty even in the face of on-field ③ failure. While most managers can only dream of having customers that are as passionate about their products as sport fans, the emotion triggered by sport can also have a negative impact. Sport’s emotional intensity can mean that organisations have strong attachments to the past through nostalgia and club tradition. As a result, they may ④ increase efficiency, productivity and the need to respond quickly to changing market conditions. For example, a proposal to change club colours in order to project a more attractive image may be ⑤ defeated because it breaks a link with tradition.
* memorabilia: 기념품 ** obsession: 집착

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The growth of academic disciplines and sub-disciplines, such as art history or palaeontology, and of particular figures such as the art critic, helped produce principles and practices for selecting and organizing what was worthy of keeping, though it remained a struggle. Moreover, as museums and universities drew further apart toward the end of the nineteenth century, and as the idea of objects as a highly valued route to knowing the world went into decline, collecting began to lose its status as a worthy intellectual pursuit, especially in the sciences. The really interesting and important aspects of science were increasingly those invisible to the  naked  eye, and the classification of things collected no longer promised   to produce cutting-edge knowledge. The term “butterfly collecting” could come to be used with the adjective “mere” to indicate a pursuit of 	academic status.
* palaeontology: 고생물학 ** adjective: 형용사
① competitive
② novel
③ secondary
④ reliable
⑤ unconditional









32. Some of the most insightful work on information seeking emphasizes “strategic self-ignorance,” understood as “the use of ignorance as an excuse to engage excessively in pleasurable activities that may be harmful to one’s future self.” The idea here is that if people are present-biased, they might avoid information that would 	― perhaps because it would produce guilt or shame, perhaps because it would suggest an aggregate trade-off that would counsel against engaging in such activities. St. Augustine famously said, “God give me chastity ― tomorrow.” Present-biased agents think: “Please let me know the risks ― tomorrow.” Whenever people are thinking about engaging in an activity with short-term benefits but long-term costs, they might prefer to delay receipt of important information. The same point might hold about information that could make people sad or mad: “Please tell me what I need to know ― tomorrow.”
* aggregate: 합계의 ** chastity: 정결
① highlight the value of preferred activities
② make current activities less attractive
③ cut their attachment to past activities
④ enable them to enjoy more activities
⑤ potentially become known to others


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Concepts of nature are always cultural statements.  This  may not strike Europeans as much of an insight, for Europe’s landscape is so much of a blend. But in the new worlds ― ‘new’ at least to Europeans ― the distinction appeared much clearer not only to European settlers and visitors but also to their descendants. For that reason, they had the fond conceit   of primeval nature uncontrolled  by  human  associations which could later find expression in an admiration for wilderness. Ecological relationships certainly have their own logic and in this sense ‘nature’ can be seen to have a self-regulating but not necessarily stable dynamic independent of human intervention. But the context for ecological interactions
 	. We may not determine how or what a lion eats but we certainly can  regulate where the lion feeds. [3점]
* conceit: 생각 ** primeval: 원시(시대)의
*** ecological: 생태학의
① has supported new environment-friendly policies
② has increasingly been set by humanity
③ inspires creative cultural practices
④ changes too frequently to be regulated
⑤ has been affected by various natural conditions






34. Emma Brindley has investigated the responses of European robins to the songs of neighbors and strangers. Despite the large and complex song repertoire of European robins, they were able to discriminate between the songs of neighbors and strangers. When they heard a tape recording of a stranger, they began to sing sooner, sang more songs, and overlapped their songs with the playback more often than they did on hearing a neighbor’s song. As Brindley suggests, the overlapping of  song may be an aggressive response. However, this difference in responding to neighbor versus stranger occurred only when the neighbor’s song was played by a  loudspeaker  placed  at the boundary between that neighbor’s territory and  the territory of the bird being tested. If the same neighbor’s song was played at another boundary, one separating the territory of the test subject from another neighbor,  it was treated as the  call of a stranger. Not only does this result demonstrate that
 	, but it also shows that the  choice  of songs used in playback experiments is highly important. [3점]
* robin: 울새 ** territory: 영역
① variety and complexity characterize the robins’ songs
② song volume affects the robins’ aggressive behavior
③ the robins’ poor territorial sense is a key to survival
④ the robins associate locality with familiar songs
⑤ the robins are less responsive to recorded songs
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Kinship ties continue to be important today. In modern societies such as the United States people frequently have family get-togethers, they telephone their relatives regularly, and they provide their kin with a wide variety of services. ① Eugene Litwak has referred to this pattern of behaviour as the ‘modified extended family’. ② It is an extended family structure because multigenerational ties are maintained, but it is modified because it does not usually rest on co-residence between the generations and most extended families do not act as corporate groups. ③ Although modified extended family members often live close by, the modified extended family does not require geographical proximity and ties are  maintained  even  when kin are separated by considerable distances. ④ The oldest member of the family makes the decisions on  important  issues, no matter how far away family members live from each other. ⑤ In contrast to the traditional extended family where kin always live in close proximity, the members of modified extended families may freely move away from kin to seek opportunities for occupational advancement.
* kin: 친족 ** proximity: 근접

[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) In a paradigm that has been repeated on many campuses, researchers first collect a list of campus landmarks from students. Then they ask another group of students to estimate the distances between pairs of locations, some to landmarks, some to ordinary buildings on campus.
(B) This asymmetry of distance estimates violates the most elementary principles of Euclidean distance, that the distance from A to B must be the same as the distance from B to A. Judgments of distance, then, are not necessarily coherent.
(C) The remarkable finding is that distances from an ordinary location to a landmark are judged shorter than distances from a landmark to an ordinary location. So, people would judge the distance from Pierre’s house to the Eiffel Tower to be shorter than the distance from the Eiffel Tower to Pierre’s house. Like black holes, landmarks seem to pull ordinary locations toward themselves, but ordinary places do not.
* asymmetry: 비대칭
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.




(A) There is a “good” outcome, in which both types of investments are made, and both the shipyard and the steelmakers end up profitable and happy. Equilibrium is reached. Then there is a “bad” outcome, in which neither type of investment is made. This second outcome also is an equilibrium because the decisions not to invest reinforce each other.
(B) Assume that shipyards are the only potential customers of steel. Steel producers figure they’ll make money if there’s a shipyard to buy their steel, but not otherwise. Now we have two possible outcomes ― what economists call “multiple equilibria.”
(C) But one key input is low-cost steel, and it must be produced nearby. The company’s decision boils down to this: if there is a steel factory close by, invest in shipbuilding; otherwise, don’t invest. Now consider the thinking of potential steel investors in the region. [3점]
* equilibrium: 균형
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
The role that sleep plays in  evolution is  still under study. ( ① ) One possibility is that it is an advantageous adaptive state of decreased metabolism for an animal when there are no more pressing activities. ( ② ) This seems true for deeper states of inactivity such as hibernation during the winter when there are few food supplies, and a high metabolic cost to maintaining adequate temperature. ( ③ ) It may be true in daily situations as well, for instance for a prey species to avoid predators after dark. ( ④ ) On the other hand, the apparent universality of sleep, and the observation that mammals such  as cetaceans have developed such highly complex mechanisms to preserve sleep on at least one side of the brain at a time, suggests that sleep additionally provides some vital service(s) for the organism. ( ⑤ ) If sleep is universal even when this potential price must be paid, the implication may be that it has important functions that cannot be obtained just by quiet, wakeful resting. [3점]
* metabolism: 신진대사 ** mammal: 포유동물

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　In most organizations, the employee’s immediate supervisor evaluates the employee’s performance. ( ① ) This is because the supervisor is responsible for the employee’s performance, providing supervision, handing out assignments, and developing the employee. ( ② ) Should supervisors rate employees on performance dimensions they cannot observe? ( ③ ) To eliminate this dilemma, more and more organizations are implementing assessments referred to as 360-degree evaluations. ( ④ ) Employees are rated not only by  their supervisors but  by coworkers, clients or citizens, professionals in other agencies with whom they work, and subordinates. ( ⑤ ) The reason for this approach is that often coworkers and clients or citizens have a greater opportunity to observe an employee’s performance and are in a better position to evaluate many performance dimensions.
* subordinate: 부하 직원









For English aristocrats, planting trees served as statements to mark the        (A)        ownership of their land, and it  was also considered to be a(n)       (B)        of their loyalty to the nation.
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① unstable …… confirmation	② unstable …… exaggeration
③ lasting  …… exhibition	④ lasting   …… manipulation
⑤ official …… justification


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)













(C)
(D) 














41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Side Effects of Privacy Protection Technologies
② The Legal Domain of Privacy Claims and Conflicts
③ The Right to Privacy: Evolving Concepts and Practices
④ Who Really Benefits from Looser Privacy Regulations?
⑤ Less Is More: Reduce State Intervention in Privacy!

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Mia와 Rebecca는 보트의 균형을 유지하려고 애썼다.
② Rebecca는 몽골에서 영어를 가르친 경험이 있다.
③ Sophia와 친구들이 함께 탄 보트는 바위에 부딪치지 않았다.
④ Sophia는 래프팅을 하기 전에는 물을 두려워했다.
⑤ Sophia는 용기를 시험할 모험을 대학 졸업 후에 하길 원했다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2020학년도

10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1

제 3 교시

영어 영역
7.대화를  듣고, 시오.



남자가 화상 회의에 참석하지



못한 이유를 고르


1.다음을  듣고, 르시오.


남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고

① 회의 시간을 착각해서
② 휴대 전화가 고장 나서
③ 접속 비밀번호를 잊어서
④ 인터넷 접속이 불안정해서
⑤ 다른 회의에 참석해야 해서

① 반려견을 위한 공원 시설 개선 아이디어를 공모하려고
② 반려견과의 공원 산책 시 준수 사항을 안내하려고
③ 반려견의 감염병 발병 시 대처법을 소개하려고

8.대화를  듣고,  Jazz  Guitar  Contest에  관해  언급되지 고르시오.

않은 것을

④ 반려견을 동반한 공원 출입 자제를 요청하려고
⑤ 공원 시설 수리를 위한 휴관을 공지하려고

① 주최 단체
④ 우승 상금

② 개최 장소
⑤ 참가비

③ 개최 시기

2.대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

9.The  10th  International  Hot  Air  Balloon  Fiesta에  관한  다음

① 의뢰인의 취향을 존중하여 인테리어를 디자인해야 한다.

내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

② 인테리어 작업은 전문가에게 맡기는 것이 좋다.

① 다음 주 월요일부터 2주간 개최된다.

③ 인테리어 공사는 예산 안에서 진행해야 한다.

② 열기구 탑승 시각은 매일 오전 10시와 오후

5시이다.

④ 집안의 색이 가족의 기분에 영향을 미친다.

③ 첫날 열기구 탑승권은 20% 할인된다.

⑤ 주기적으로 가구를 재배치하는 것이 좋다.

④ 열기구는 다양한 국기로 장식된다.

3.대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.

⑤ 웹 사이트에서 실시간으로 스트리밍된다.

① 자전거 수리공 ? 고객

② 스포츠 기자 ? 사이클 선수

10.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,

여자가 구매할 캣 트리를 고

③ 건물 청소부 ? 입주민

④ 골동품 감정사 ?

의뢰인

르시오.

⑤ 농기구 판매상 ? 농장주

Multi -Level Cat Trees



4.대화를  듣고, 고르시오.

그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지

않는 것을


①
②
③
④
⑤

1.대화를 듣고,





여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장

적절한 것을 고르시오.



5.대화를  듣고,



여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을

① Thanks. That would be a great help.
② Really? You’d better leave school early.
③ Okay. Then, let me call my doctor later.
④ I know how you feel. It must hurt a lot.
⑤ Oh, no. You should have been more careful.

고르시오.
① 요리 강습 신청하기
③ 김치 시식 후기 쓰기
⑤ 요리 재료 구매하기


② 김치 조리법 전송하기
④ 채식 도시락 주문하기

12.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Definitely. Don’t forget to wash it after emptying it.
② Look at the expiration date! We shouldn’t buy this.

6.대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]

③ Yes. It’s cheaper to buy it from an online store.
④ No. We shouldn’t put too much ketchup on the food.

① $25	② $30

③ $35

④ $40

⑤ $45

⑤ Sure. We can keep the ketchup at room temperature.




2	영어 영역

13.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Collins,

① That’s a good idea. I’ll sign up for a booth.
② I disagree. Camping equipment is overpriced.
③ Yes. I’m looking for a two­bedroom apartment.
④ I see it differently. Selling offline is much easier.
⑤ Thanks. But I can manage the packing on my own.
　
I am writing on behalf of Green Youth Center. We will  be conducting a program titled “Arts For All.” This program aims to spend time with young children and provide an art education program for them. In line with this, we would like to ask for your support for the program. We are expecting 50－80 children ages 5－8 years as participants. We would greatly appreciate donations such as art supplies, picture books, or any other materials that would be beneficial to children’s art education. We sincerely thank

14.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장

you for your kind consideration in advance.

적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	

Best regards,
Rose Sanders, Program Coordinator

① Oh, really? Good luck with your book search.
② I don’t think so. Reading is not for everybody.
③ Hold on. Let me bring the books you requested.
④ Not at all. You should respect his taste in books.
⑤ Okay. I hope my son enjoys reading books there.

① 미술 교육 프로그램 운영에 조언을 구하려고
② 신설되는 교육 프로그램에 강사로 초빙하려고
③ 교육 프로그램 참가자에게 준비물을 안내하려고
④ 어린이를 위한 미술 프로그램 개설을 건의하려고
⑤ 미술 교육 프로그램을 위한 물품 기부를 요청하려고



19.다음 글에 드러난

‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?

15.다음  상황  설명을 듣고,  Josh가 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Lily에게 할 말로 가장 적절한
　
Daddy hums as he packs our car with suitcases and a cooler full of snacks. We leave when the sky is still dark with sleep. Sister closes her eyes, but mine stay wide open.

Josh:   	

“Alan,” Momma says after a while, “you better catch some

① It’s too bad that your phone is not working.
② Just turn off your phone when you go to bed.
③ Did you check out the latest model at the shop?
④ You’re not allowed to use your phone during class.
⑤ Why don’t you switch your phone to one like mine?

sleep while you can.” I try to rest, but can’t stop smiling. Soon I’ll get to see my great­grandma Granny and hang out with my cousins. But when I look at my hands, empty as the road in front of us, my grin fades. The anniversary celebration. I bet everyone will bring something to share except me. I have nothing prepared for Granny. I’m suddenly overwhelmed with worries.

① scared

→ relieved

② excited	→ anxious

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

③ bored	→ surprised

④ ashamed →

thankful

16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① chemical compositions of fatty acids
② benefits of various vegetable cooking oils
③ tips for choosing fresh vegetable cooking oils
④ roles of fatty acids in delaying the aging process
⑤ advantages of vegetable oils as a flavor enhancer

⑤ amazed → indifferent
20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One of the funniest things about becoming a boss is that it causes an awful lot of people to forget everything they know about how to relate to other people. If you have a complaint about somebody in your personal life, it would never occur to you to wait for a formally scheduled meeting to tell them. Yet, management has been bureaucratized to the point that we throw away effective strategies of everyday communication.

17.언급된 기름이 아닌 것은?

Don’t	let		the		formal		processes		like	annual	performance reviews	take	over.	They	are	meant		to	reinforce,	not

① coconut oil
④ grapeseed oil

② olive oil
⑤ walnut oil

③ avocado oil

substitute, what we do every day. You’d never let the fact that you go to the dentist for a cleaning a couple times a year prevent you from brushing your teeth every day.
① 정확하고 구체적으로 직원들에게 피드백을 제공하라.
② 업무에 대한 동료의 건전한 비판을  겸허히 수용하라.
③ 직원 결속을 위해 회사 내 비공식적 모임을 활성화하라.
④ 직장에서 상사에게 이의를 제기할 때는 격식을 존중하라.
⑤ 절차에만 의존하지 말고 부하 직원들과 일상적으로 소통하라.




영어 영역	3

21.밑줄  친  boil  a  pot  of  water  on  medium  heat가  다음  글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Under­slept employees are not going to drive your business forward with productive innovation. Like a group of people riding stationary exercise bikes, everyone looks like they are pedaling, but the scenery never changes. The irony that employees miss is that when you are not getting enough sleep, you work less productively and thus need to work longer to accomplish a goal. This means you often must work longer and later into the evening, arrive home later, go to bed later, and need to wake up earlier, creating a negative feedback loop. Why try to boil a pot of water on medium heat when you could do so in half the time on high? People often tell me that they do not have enough time to sleep because they have so much work to do. Without wanting to be combative in any way whatsoever, I respond by informing them that perhaps the reason they still have so much to do at the end of the day is precisely because they do not get enough sleep at night.
① multitask beyond your limits

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
　The principle of humane treatment exerts an important constraint on the administration of criminal justice, a state­run process which has the potential to do very great harm to anybody who becomes caught up in its snares. Suspects and the accused are the ones most obviously in jeopardy. Procedural rules contribute to suspects’ humane treatment by providing them with legal advice and assistance to prepare and present their cases in court. Rules of evidence perform a similar function by affording accused persons fair opportunity to answer the charges against them, whilst at the same time respecting their right to remain silent if they choose to keep their counsel and put the prosecution to proof. These and other rules of criminal evidence and procedure treat the accused as thinking, feeling, human subjects of official concern and respect, who are entitled to be given the opportunity to play an active part in procedures with a direct and possibly catastrophic impact on their welfare.
* snare: 덫 ** prosecution: 검찰 측

② work inefficiently for longer hours
③ give up your passion in your career
④ keep a healthy work­and­life balance
⑤ compare your accomplishments with others

2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The tendency for the market to reward caring for others may just be an incentive to act, or pretend, as if one cares for others. Say, for instance, a shopkeeper who realizes he is losing exchange opportunities because of his dishonest behavior may begin to act as if he were a kind and honest man in order to garner more business. He is persuaded to behave in an appropriate way, yet his actions may be insincere. While it is socially beneficial that he at least pretends to behave in this way, he may not actually become more virtuous. However, in order to maintain this status in his community and succeed in his business long term, he must continue to behave in this manner. Over time, it is likely that his once  intentional  actions  will become instinctive and more genuine, and eventually result in actual moral development. Stated another way, a truly dishonest and conniving person is unlikely to convincingly pretend to be reputable for an extended period of time without being impacted by some sort of moral development.
* garner: 얻다 ** conniving: (남을) 음해하는
① 장기간의 의도적 행동을 통해 도덕적  발달이 가능하다.
② 개인의 양심적 행동이 사회 전체의 도덕성을  결정한다.
③ 부정직해 보이는 행동에도 선한 의도가 있을 수 있다.
④ 시대에 따라 사업가에게 중시되는 덕목이 달라진다.
⑤ 사업 운영에 가장 중요한 가치는 정직과 친절이다.

① correlations between crime rates and social welfare
② efforts to revise outdated criminal justice procedures
③ expanding government roles in controlling the crime rate
④ changing the definition of humane treatment in modern criminal justice
⑤ humane treatment of suspects and the accused in the criminal justice system

24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The view of AI breakthroughs that the public gets from the media－stunning victories over humans, robots becoming citizens of Saudi Arabia, and so on－bears very little relation to what really happens in the world’s research labs. Inside the lab, research involves a lot of thinking and talking and writing mathematical formulas on whiteboards. Ideas are constantly being generated, abandoned, and rediscovered. A good idea－a real breakthrough－will often go unnoticed at the time and may only later be understood as having provided the basis for a substantial advance in AI, perhaps when someone reinvents it at a more convenient time. Ideas are tried out, initially on simple problems to show that the basic intuitions are correct and then on harder problems to see how well they scale up. Often, an idea will fail by itself to provide a substantial improvement in capabilities, and it has to wait for another idea to come along so that the combination of the two can demonstrate value.
① AI Breakthroughs: Not an Instant Success
② Rediscovering the Human­Machine Relationship
③ AI Breakthroughs Born Outside Research  Labs
④ The Self­Evolving Nature of Smart Technology
⑤ AI: A Pioneer of Breakthroughs in Human History




4	영어 영역

25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27.Pottery Painting Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?





　The above graph shows the top eight countries by the amount of  electronic  waste  (e­waste)  generated  in  2016.  ① The  two


① O­Paint Pottery Studio의 강사가 학교에 와서 진행한다.

countries that generated the most e­waste in 2016 were China

② 금요일 저녁에 2시간 동안 진행된다.

and the United States, each producing more than 6 million

③ 도자기 품목 세 가지 중 하나를 선택할 수 있다.

metric tons of e­waste. ② The combined amount of total

④ 참가비 중 절반이 Waine 도서관에 기부된다.

e­waste of the bottom three countries－Russia, Brazil, and

⑤ 도자기를 구운 후 참가자에게 돌려준다.

France－was less than that of the United States. ③ Among the

eight countries, China was first in the total amount of e­waste, but its per capita e­waste production was the second smallest.
④ Though the amount of e­waste generated in India was larger than that in Japan just by 0.1 million metric tons, e­waste per capita in India was less than one tenth of that in Japan. ⑤ The amount of e­waste per capita was over 20 kg in two countries, with Germany leading France by 1.5 kg.

26.Roman Jakobson에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Roman Jakobson was one of the greatest linguists of the 20th century. He was born in Russia and was a member of the Russian Formalist school as early as 1915. Jakobson taught in Czechoslovakia between the two world wars, where he was one of the leaders of the influential Prague Linguistic Circle. When Czechoslovakia was invaded by the Nazis, he was forced to flee to Scandinavia, and went from there to the United States in 1941. In 1943 he became one of the founding members of the Linguistic Circle of New York and acted as its vice president until 1949. He taught at numerous institutions from 1943 on, including Harvard University and MIT. Through his teaching in the United States, Jakobson helped to bridge the gap between European and American linguistics. Known as the father of modern structural linguistics, he elaborated sophisticated theories of language and communication that have had significant effects on such disciplines as anthropology, art criticism, and brain research.


28.Double  Swan  Hot  Springs에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과  일 치하는 것은?









One­Day Pass10­Swim PassAdults$12$85Children (3－12)2 & UnderDouble Swan residents: 50% off
① 1915년에

Russian Formalist

학파의 일원이었다.

① 수영장의 수온은 겨울보다 여름이 더 높다.

② Prague Linguistic Circle의 지도자 중 한 명이었다.	② 화요일에는 개장하지 않는다.

③ 1941년에 미국에서 스칸디나비아로 이주했다.

③ Double Swan 주민은 절반 가격에 이용할 수 있다.

④ 유럽과 미국 언어학 사이의 간극을 좁히는 데에 기여했다.
⑤ 현대 구조 언어학의 아버지로 알려져 있다.

④ 이용객은 수영 장비를 빌릴 수 있다.
⑤ 웹 사이트를 통해서만 예약할 수 있다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은?  [3점]

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

　Mathematical practices and discourses should be situated within cultural contexts, student interests, and real­life situations ① where all students develop positive identities as mathematics learners. Instruction in mathematics skills in isolation and devoid of student understandings and identities renders them ② helpless to benefit from explicit instruction. Thus, we agree that explicit instruction benefits students but propose that incorporating culturally relevant pedagogy and consideration of nonacademic factors that ③ promoting learning and mastery must enhance explicit instruction in mathematics instruction. Furthermore, teachers play a critical role in developing environments ④ that encourage student identities, agency, and independence through discourses and practices in the classroom. Students who are actively engaged in a contextualized learning process are in control of the learning process and are able to make connections with past learning experiences ⑤ to foster deeper and more meaningful learning.
31. 
Some people may find it hard to believe they are making a difference all the time. In which case, it may help to abandon the global perspective for a moment and zoom in to our daily human interactions－in which we spend every moment either deciding what must happen next or going along with somebody else’s ideas. Either way, our actions are all purposeful, and all produce effects. Our day­to­day lives are hardly the stuff of history, you might argue. Certainly not compared with Julius Caesar invading Britain, Genghis Khan sacking Baghdad and Christopher Columbus discovering America. That’s how many people understand history. ‘The history of the world is but the biography of great men,’ wrote Thomas Carlyle. But the ‘great man’ theory of history has been on its way out for years. Nowadays, we recognize that those men couldn’t have done what they did on their own. And we identify historical significance in hitherto 	.
* sack: 약탈하다

* render: (어떤 상태가 되게) 만들다

** pedagogy: 교수법

① overlooked episodes
② unchallenged power
③ suppressed desire
④ voluntary surrender
⑤ unexpected disasters









30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,
않은 것은?



문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
32. 
The diffusion of media products enables us in a certain sense to experience events, observe others and, in general, learn about a world that extends beyond the sphere of our day­to­day encounters. The spatial horizons of our understanding are thereby greatly expanded, for they are no longer restricted by the need to be physically present at the

　In collectivist groups, there is considerable emphasis on relationships, the maintenance of harmony, and “sticking with” the group. Members of collectivist groups are socialized to avoid conflict, to ① empathize with others, and to avoid drawing attention to themselves. In contrast, members of individualist cultures tend to define themselves in terms of their independence from groups and autonomy and are socialized to ② value individual freedoms and individual expressions. In individualist cultures, standing out and being different is often seen as a sign of ③ weakness. Implicit in the characterization of collectivist and individualist groups is the assumption that deviance will be ④ downgraded more in

places where the observed events, etc., occur. So profound is the extent to which our sense of the world is shaped by media products today that, when we travel to distant parts of the world as a visitor or tourist, our lived experience is often preceded by a set of images and expectations acquired through extended exposure to media products. Even in those cases where our experience of distant places does not concur with our expectations, the feeling of novelty or surprise often attests to the fact that our lived experience is preceded by a set of preconceptions derived, at least to some extent, from 	.
* attest to: ~을 입증하다

groups that prescribe collectivism than in groups that prescribe individualism. Indeed, empirical research shows that individualist group norms broaden the latitude of ⑤ acceptable group member behavior and non­normative characteristics.
* deviance: 일탈, 표준에서 벗어남

① our collective world views inherited from ancestors
② the words and images conveyed by the media
③ a critical attitude toward media products
④ a belief on the media’s roles in politics
⑤ emotional responses to unusual events




6	영어 영역

3.At the level of hours and minutes, the most relevant constants are human heart rates, which normally vary from
60 to 100 beats per minute, and the need to spend roughly one­third of our time sleeping in order to function properly. Biologists and physiologists still don’t know why this is so. Moving down to the level of time that occurs at 1/1000 of a second are biological constants with respect to the temporal resolution of our senses. If a sound has a gap in it shorter than 10 milliseconds, we will tend not to hear it, because of resolution limits of the auditory system. For a similar reason, a series of clicks ceases to sound like clicks and becomes a musical note when the clicks are presented at a rate of about once every 25 milliseconds. If you’re flipping through static (still) pictures, they must be presented slower than about once every 40 milliseconds in order for you to see them as separate images. Any faster than that and 	and we perceive motion where there is none. [3점]
* constant: 상수

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계없는 문장은?
　In the case of classical music performance, notwithstanding the perhaps increased psychological pressure to achieve “perfection,” to a large extent it is the participation in a physical pursuit of  excellence  that links  art  to sports.
① Musicians and athletes both must attempt to create mistake­free performances that require finely tuned neural and muscle control enabled by countless hours of practice.
② For both activities, disciplining the body and mind is central to achieving what is typically considered a successful performance. ③ Standard descriptions of the actions of the muscles controlling the hand can give a misleading impression of the degree to which the fingers can be controlled independently. ④ Indeed one might assume that one of the prime objectives of art, as in sports, is to win recognition for the artist/performer’s technical physical ability. ⑤ Thus, in essence, even music becomes a competition for performers, who compete against their own

① details become clearer than when seen one by one
② our biological rhythms change along with their speed
③ the biological constants of our auditory system disappear
④ our visual system and auditory system function together

bodies, if not those of others, in attaining recognition for their performances.

[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것

⑤ they exceed the temporal resolution of our visual system

을 고르시오.
36.

34. It is well established that the aerobic range of flight speeds for any bird is restricted. The well­established U­shaped function of aerodynamic power requirement as a function of flight speed has wide applicability. It shows that for most birds, slow flight, even for short periods, is not possible and this becomes more acute for birds with high wing loading and consequently higher average flight speeds. In essence, birds cannot readily slow down. Sustained slow flight for a bird which has a high average flight speed is costly or aerodynamically impossible and, hence, being able to reduce speed in order to   	 is unlikely to occur. In other words, when the environment restricts the information available (e.g. rain, mist, low light levels), birds cannot easily fly more slowly in order to compensate for lowered visibility. Thus if birds are to fly under non­ideal perceptual conditions, or visibility conditions change during a flight, they cannot act in the way that a careful car driver can and reduce their speed in order to gain information at a rate sufficient to match the new perceptual challenge. [3점]
① create a flight formation to use less energy in the air
② take advantage of the rising and descending air currents
③ modify	the	path	to	take	a	shorter	route	to	their destination
④ inform its flightmates of the need to complement the



(A) As important as the quality of the image may be, however, it must not be considered so important that the purpose of the film as an artistic, unified whole is ignored. A film’s photographic effects should not be created for their own sake as independent, beautiful, or powerful images.
(B) In the final analysis, they must be justified psychologically and dramatically, as well as aesthetically, as important means to an end, not as ends in themselves. Creating beautiful images for the sake of creating beautiful images violates a film’s aesthetic unity and may actually work against the film.
(C) So it follows naturally that the aesthetic quality and dramatic power of the image are extremely important to the overall quality of a film. Although the nature and quality of the story, editing, musical score, sound effects, dialogue, and acting can do much to enhance a film’s power, even these important elements cannot save a film whose images are mediocre or poorly edited.
* mediocre: 썩 좋지 않은

extended flying time
⑤ match	the	rate	of	gain	of information	to	increasing perceptual challenges

① (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.

　When dealing with investments, different people have different risk profiles. If risk is a continuum from high risk to low risk, a retired investor will generally take less risk than a young investor just entering the market.
(A) No, younger investors tend to take more risk with their investments because they have a longer time horizon on when they expect to actually need their money. For the vast majority of people, the reason they invest is so they can enjoy retirement.
(B) Why is this? Why are younger investors generally willing to take more risks than older investors? It is not because younger people don’t care or tend to make hazardous decisions, although that may be true to some extent.
(C) This means that younger people are not expecting to sell their investments for twenty or thirty years. With this kind of time horizon, they can afford to shoot for the higher risk, higher return investments. For them, the prospect of losing money is not that bad. If they lose, they still have time to make it up. [3점]

These constraints may be helpful to facilitate agreement, as they put pressure on parties to come to agreement.
　Any negotiation is bounded in terms of time allocated to it, and time constraints are especially important when it comes to constitutional negotiations. ( ① ) Constitutions are typically, though not always, adopted in moments of high political drama, perhaps even violent crisis. ( ② ) Often there are upstream constraints that limit the amount of time available to drafters－deadlines that are exogenously fixed and cannot be evaded. ( ③ ) But they also bound the negotiation and prevent the parties from spelling out a complete set of arrangements, and so the constitutional bargain will of necessity be incomplete. ( ④ ) Negotiators may focus only on the largest, most salient issues, leaving more minor ones unresolved. ( ⑤ ) Time pressures contribute to the introduction of structural mistakes in the constitutional text, seeding pitfalls for the immediate post­constitution­making period. [3점]
* exogenously: 외적인 요인으로 ** salient: 두드러진

① (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다. (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

빈칸 (A),


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장

적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
At least one researcher has speculated that the ability of the new arrivals to produce more advanced clothing involving closely fitting skins was significant.
　Why Neanderthals became extinct about 40,000 years ago to be replaced by modern humans is debated, but the two most favored theories are deteriorating climate conditions together with competition from the new arrivals. ( ① ) Since the Neanderthals had already become acclimatized to cold conditions for at least 200,000 years in Europe, it may seem counterintuitive that they lost out to the new arrivals, who were not only unaccustomed to cold climate but who came from a subtropical African climate, via the Near East. ( ② ) It  appears  that  the  technological  superiority  of Homosapiens           played a role. ( ③ ) The population of the new arrivals increased tenfold as the population of the existing Neanderthals decreased. ( ④ ) This presumably required sewing hides together, possibly in double layers, and fastening them with buttons or pegs, allowing the wearer to hunt in colder conditions. ( ⑤ ) In contrast, the Neanderthals may have had only a single  layer or wrap­around clothing, which did not involve sophisticated tailoring or sewing.









What  makes  cyberspace  unique is not the   (A)    of its virtual reality but the interaction among people that gives cyberspace the feeling of (B) .
(A) (B)
① novelty	······	authenticity
② novelty	······	security
③ variety	······	completeness
④ accessibility	······	authority
⑤ accessibility	······	hospitality




8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42]

다음 글을 읽고,

물음에 답하시오.
(B) 

　Hazel nodded and Louise left her alone. Louise grabbed her things from the staffroom and walked out, passing by the charity shop at the end of the ward. The teddy in the window immediately caught (b) her eye. It looked very similar to the one that Hazel was missing and it was a bargain at five pounds. She went straight in and bought it. Checking her watch, she walked briskly back to the ward.
(C) 
　When Louise returned, Hazel’s mum, Sarah, was outside the cubicle talking on her phone. Louise nodded and smiled at Sarah as she passed and ducked back into Hazel’s cubicle. “Now (c) I know this isn’t your bear, but I think this one will do just as good a job looking after you,” Louise said, handing it to Hazel who gasped. “Really?” Hazel’s face lit up as she looked at it. That smile made all the long hours and the hard tasks (d) she often had to deal with worth it.







41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(D) 

　Hazel was battling cancer and was in and out of the hospital, which broke Louise’s heart, but somehow she stayed positive throughout. Louise supposed she shouldn’t really have favourite patients, but Hazel was definitely hers. “Mum got me a new colouring book. She’s gone home to try and find my teddy. We think we might have lost it when I went for tests the other day.” Louise remembered the cute bear that Hazel usually had. “Oh, I’m sorry. I’m sure he’ll turn up. Enjoy your colouring and I’ll see (e) you when I’m next in?”

① Let Your Social Skills Speak for You

43.주어진  글

(A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로

② The Key to Building Character and Personality	가장 적절한 것은?

③ Silence Your Impulses and Achieve Inner Peace
④ Why Do We Move Away from Our True Selves?
⑤ Can We Base Self­Worth on Social Achievements?

① (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

② (C) - (B) - (D)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)



42.밑줄 친  (a)~(e)

중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은

4.밑줄 친

(a)~(e)

중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른

것은? [3점]
① (a)


② (b)


③ (c)


④ (d)


⑤ (e)

것은?
① (a)


② (b)


③ (c)


④ (d)


⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

① Louise는 Hazel의 병상을 들여다보았다.
② 자선 상점의 곰 인형은 Hazel이 잃어버린 것과 비슷했다.

　Louise checked her watch and began a last sweep of the paediatric ward she worked on. The hospital was

③ Hazel은 Louise가 건넨 곰 인형을 보고 얼굴이 환해졌다.
④ Hazel은 엄마가 칠하기 그림책을 사러 나갔다고 말했다.

always busy; there was very little time to think about anything other than what was right there in front of you. Louise paused in front of her favourite cubicle and looked in. “All set for the afternoon?” (a) she asked Hazel, who was six and had just come back to the ward.
* paediatric: 소아과의

⑤ Louise는 Hazel이 지니고 있던 곰 인형을 기억했다.





제 3 교시

2019학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
1



6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.






1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.

① Let’s meet at the library.
② I already handed in the report.
③ It’s hard to change the schedule.
④ You must finish the work by 4 o’clock.
⑤ We shouldn’t have missed the deadline.





2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Sorry. The scarf already sold out.
② Okay. I’ll buy a pair of earrings then.
③ Perfect. These earrings look good on you.
④ Don’t worry. The party hasn’t started yet.
⑤ Sure. I already threw her a birthday party.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 열기구 비행 코스를 설명하려고
② 야외 활동 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 열기구 탑승 안전 수칙을 안내하려고
④ 비행기 출발 시간의 지연을 공지하려고
⑤ 소지품 분실에 대한 주의를 당부하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아파트 옥상에 텃밭을 조성하는 것의 장점
② 지역사회 내 공동체 의식 함양의 필요성
③ 가정에서 미세 먼지에 대처하는 방법
④ 정서 발달에 정원이 미치는 영향
⑤ 유기농 작물 재배의 어려움



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 테니스 코치 - 선수	② 배드민턴 강사 - 학부모
③ 정형외과 의사 - 환자	④ 헬스 트레이너 - 헬스장 이용객
⑤ 스포츠용품 판매원 - 고객

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 운동장 대여하기	② 티셔츠 제작하기
③ 간식 만들기	④ 샌드위치 주문하기
⑤ 구급상자 구입하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 콘서트에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 도서 박람회에 가야 해서
② 가족 모임에 참석해야 해서
③ 도서관 자원봉사를 해야 해서
④ 개교기념일 행사를 준비해야 해서
⑤ 자선 마라톤 대회에 참가해야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $63	② $70	③ $72	④ $80	⑤ $81


10. 대화를 듣고, Hartford River Market에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 판매 품목	② 운영 시간	③ 위치
④ 주차 시설	⑤ 체험 활동 종류


1 . The 10th International Sunnyvale Flower Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 주제는 ‘꽃, 평화, 미래’이다.
② 200개 업체가 참가할 예정이다.
③ 꽃을 이용한 마술 쇼가 열릴 것이다.
④ 개막식에서 불꽃놀이가 펼쳐질 것이다.
⑤ 온라인에서 표를 구입하면 할인받을 수 있다.




2 영어	영역

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 의류 건조기를 고르시오.
Clothes Dryer Models

①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Never mind. It’s my pleasure to give you a piece of advice.
② Right. I’d better choose physics for my future dream.
③ Exactly. You should always be honest with yourself.
④ I agree. I should take chemistry instead of physics.
⑤ Don’t worry. Let me cancel the class for you.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① No problem. I’ll help you to promote your campaign.
② Absolutely. We should release animals into the wild.
③ Sure. You have to consider many things in raising a pet.
④ Not at all. Editing a video clip is not that difficult for me.
⑤ Thanks. Your support will bring new life to abandoned dogs.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, John이 Emma에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
John:  	
① You should stop blaming others for your own faults.
② Turn off electronics before bedtime to sleep better.
③ What about living in a dormitory to focus on your studies?
④ You had better let your roommate do what she wants to do.
⑤ Why don’t you frankly discuss the problem with your roommate?

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① side effects of natural food therapies
② easily overlooked common symptoms
③ traditional but still effective remedies
④ benefits of organically cultivated foods
⑤ comparisons of old and modern medicines
17. 언급된 증상이 아닌 것은?
① sore throat	② dry skin	③ headache
④ sunburn	⑤ nausea



18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 야구장 이용 시간을 문의하려고
② 교내 안전교육 강화를 요청하려고
③ 공원 시설의 재정비를 건의하려고
④ 주민 체육 행사 협조를 부탁하려고
⑤ 체험 학습 프로그램 참가를 신청하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Timothy의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? Suddenly, just a few minutes after Timothy dozed off,
something woke him up. Something was crawling on his belly as he was lying there with nothing around his upper body. Two scorpions from the rocks above had fallen on his stomach. They were battling with each other. Timothy, not knowing what to do, stayed very still just watching them fight. His heart started pounding heavily; he was too scared to make a move. Sweat poured from his forehead. The two scorpions were violently attacking each other, and it seemed they were fighting to the death. Timothy nervously looked down at the ground. He saw another scorpion, and not far from that one was another one. This time Timothy started to sweat even more heavily.
① touched and grateful	② puzzled and frightened
③ pleased and delighted ④ depressed and sorrowful
⑤ disappointed and ashamed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Interactions with people are the major source of emotional stress, but it doesn’t have to be that way. The problem is that we are continually judging people, wishing they were something that they are not. We want to change them. We want them to think and act a certain way, most often the way we think and act. And because this is not possible, because everyone is different, we are continually frustrated and upset. Instead, see other people as phenomena, as neutral as comets or plants. They simply exist. They come in all varieties, making life rich and interesting. Work with what they give you, instead of resisting and trying to change them. Make understanding people a fun game, the solving of puzzles. It is all part of the human comedy. Yes, people are irrational, but so are you. Make your acceptance of human nature as radical as possible. This will calm you down and help you observe people more dispassionately, understanding them on a deeper level.
① 대인 관계에서 타인을 바꾸려 하기보다 있는 그대로 받아들여야 한다.
② 감정적 피로를 줄이기 위해서는 활동적인 취미를 가져야 한다.
③ 문제 해결을 위해서는 일관성 있는 판단 기준을 가져야 한다.
④ 잘못된 행동을 교정하려면 인내심을 가지고 노력해야 한다.
⑤ 의사소통 능력을 기르기 위해 타인의 말을 경청해야 한다.




영어	영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 everyoneis noone이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장
적절한 것은?

　Many writers make the common mistake of being too vague when picturing a reader. When it comes to identifying a target audience, everyone is noone. You may worry about excluding         other people if you write specifically for one individual. Relax
― that  doesn’t  necessarily  happen.  A  well-defined  audience simplifies decisions about explanations and word choice. Your style may become more distinctive, in a way that attracts people beyond the target reader. For example, Andy Weir wrote TheMartian for science fiction readers who want their  stories firmly grounded in scientific fact, and perhaps rocket scientists who enjoy science fiction. I belong to neither audience, yet I enjoyed the book. Weir was so successful at pleasing his target audience that they shared it widely and enthusiastically. Because Weir didn’t try to cater to everyone, he wrote something that delighted his core audience. Eventually, his work traveled far beyond that sphere. It may be counterintuitive, but if you want to broaden your impact, tighten your focus on the reader.
① It is desirable to consider as broad a class of readers as possible.
② All readers want to buy best sellers regardless of their tastes.
③ A story can cause various reactions depending on its readers.
④ Trying to satisfy all readers leads to nobody’s satisfaction.
⑤ To specifically target readers is harmful to fiction writers.




2 . 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect of shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you are flying from Los Angeles to New York City. If a pilot leaving from LAX (Los Angeles International Airport) adjusts the heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in Washington, D.C., instead of New York. Such a small change is barely noticeable at takeoff ― the nose of the airplane moves just a few feet ― but when magnified across the entire United States, you end up hundreds of miles apart. Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a very different destination. Making a choice that is 1 percent better or 1 percent worse seems insignificant in the moment, but over the span of moments that make up a lifetime these choices determine the difference between who you are and who you could be. Success is the product of daily habits ― not once-in-a-lifetime transformations.
① 적절한 보상은 올바른 습관 형성에 도움이 된다.
② 행동하기 전에 신중하게 생각하는 태도가 필요하다.
③ 습관을 변화시키는 데는 끈기 있는 자세가 요구된다.
④ 과감한 변화를 추구해야 인생에서 성공을 이룰 수 있다.
⑤ 일상 습관의 작은 변화가 결국 인생에서 큰 차이를 만든다.

23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Good architecture and good engineering are both arts requiring science ― but they are aimed at different purposes. Art is difficult to define but is an ability to make something of more than ordinary significance. Science is a branch of knowledge which is systematic, testable, and objective ― science is what we know. When architecture and engineering get artificially separated, the outcomes may not be as they should be. For example, a developer investing in a new building might appoint an architect to develop a scheme proposal to meet the needs of the client. If that is done without the involvement of properly qualified engineers then, later, when the project gets underway, there will inevitably be practical problems. In the worst building projects architects specify structural forms that may simply be unbuildable or unnecessarily expensive to build. It follows that in the best building projects architects and engineers work together right from the start. Good structural design can provide a huge amount of savings in the cost of construction.
① necessity of the combination of architecture and engineering
② roles of engineering in understanding architectural history
③ superiority of art to science in architectural engineering
④ conflicts in applying engineering to structural design
⑤ relationship between capital and art in construction







24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The human brain wants to stay where it is, in the comfort zone. If we stay in our comfort zone, we don’t have to struggle to survive. We minimize the risk to our survival by staying where we know we are safe. I often explain to my MBA students that the reason they take the same seat in class every week is that we are, at our core, instinctual animals. Once we have chosen a seat and made it through class safely without being attacked, the part of our brain responsible for our survival tells us that our best option is to repeat that behavior, because in a way it is the most economical use of our energy. As part of its strategy for survival, our brain wants to conserve energy, so once we sit in a particular spot and know that it’s safe, we will subconsciously want to sit there every time and avoid having to reevaluate the safety of a new spot.
① How to Use a Brain to Its Maximal Capacity
② Brain’s Role as an Efficient Regulator of Instinct
③ Comfort Zone: A Fundamental Limitation on Our Ability
④ Humans’ Survival Strategy: Sticking to Where We Feel Safe
⑤ Trust Your Consciousness over Subconsciousness for Safety!




4	영어	영역

25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Statistics on Animals Used in Research, New Zealand in 2014 and 2015


　The tables above show statistics on animals used in research in New Zealand in 2014 and 2015. ① The total number of animals used in research in 2015 was lower than that of animals used in 2014. ② Cattle were the most used animals in research both in 2014 and in 2015, followed by mice which accounted for over 18% and over 21% respectively. ③ Sheep ranked higher than fish in 2014, but their ranks switched places with each other in 2015. ④ While the number of rats dropped below 10,000 in 2015, their ranking among all the animals remained the same as in 2014. ⑤ Meanwhile, primates were never used, and cats and dogs were less than 1% of all the animals used in research both in 2014 and in 2015.

26. Ivan Turgenev에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
   Ivan Turgenev, the first Russian writer to be widely celebrated in the West, was born in Russia in 1818. He entered the University of Moscow in 1833, but before a year had passed he transferred to the University of St. Petersburg because of a family move. Later, he traveled to Germany, where he enrolled at the University of Berlin and studied philosophy for three years. Upon returning to St. Petersburg and failing to find an academic position, he began work as a public official there, but his interests turned more and more toward literature. After retiring from the service, he went to France. By the mid-1850s, he was spending as much time in Europe as in Russia. In August of 1860 in England, he conceived the idea for his Fathersand Sons; he finished the novel in July of 1861 in Russia. The book received a hostile reaction in Russia, but gained prominence in the Western world. He received an honorary degree from the University of Oxford in 1879.
① Moscow 대학 입학 후 St. Petersburg 대학으로 옮겼다.
② 독일에서 3년 동안 철학을 공부했다.
③ St. Petersburg에서 공무원으로 일한 적이 있다.
④ 소설 FathersandSons를 영국에서 완성했다.
⑤ Oxford 대학으로부터 명예 학위를 받았다.
27. 
Reptile Garden에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 대중교통을 이용해서 갈 수 있다.
② 6세 이하는 무료로 입장할 수 있다.
③ 파충류 그리기 대회의 상품은 악어 인형이다.
④ 도마뱀에게 먹일 사료를 현장에서 구매할 수 있다.
⑤ 플래시를 사용하는 사진 촬영은 허용되지 않는다.

28. Beach Cleanup Day 2019에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 매년 진행되며 올해는 일요일에 개최된다.
② 각 구역에 대한 청소는 5시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 프로 서퍼 사인회 이후에 라이브 음악 공연이 있다.
④ 기부할 옷을 가져올 수 있다.
⑤ 비가 오는 경우에는 취소된다.




영어	영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The present moment feels special. It is real. However much you may remember the past or anticipate the future, you live in the present. Of course, the moment ① during which you read that sentence is no longer happening. This one is. In other words, it feels as though time flows, in the sense that the present is constantly updating ② itself. We have a deep intuition that the future is open until it becomes present and ③ that the past is fixed. As time flows, this structure of fixed past, immediate present and open future gets carried forward in time. Yet as ④ naturally as this way of thinking is, you will not find it reflected in science. The equations of physics do not tell us which events are occurring right now ― they are like a map without the “you are here” symbol. The present moment does not exist in them, and therefore neither ⑤ does the flow of time.







30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

　The conscious preference for apparent simplicity in the early-twentieth-century modernist movement in prose and poetry was echoed in what is known as the International Style of architecture. The new literature (A) avoided / embraced old-fashioned words, elaborate images, grammatical inversions, and sometimes even meter and rhyme. In the same way, one of the basic principles of early modernist architecture was that every part of a building must be (B) decorative / functional , without any unnecessary or fancy additions. Most International Style architecture aggressively banned moldings and sometimes even window and door frames. Like the prose of Hemingway or Samuel Beckett, it proclaimed, and sometimes proved, that less was more. But some modern architects, unfortunately, designed buildings that looked simple and elegant but didn’t in fact function very well: their flat roofs leaked in wet climates and their metal railings and window frames rusted. Absolute (C) complexity / simplicity , in most cases, remained an ideal rather than a reality, and in the early twentieth century complex architectural decorations continued to be used in many private and public buildings.
* inversion: 도치

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The skeletons found in early farming villages in the Fertile
Crescent are usually shorter than those of neighboring foragers, which suggests that their diets were less varied. Though farmers could produce more food, they were also more likely to starve, because, unlike foragers, they relied on a small number of crops, and if those crops failed, they were in serious trouble. The bones of early farmers show evidence of vitamin deficiencies, probably caused by regular periods of starvation between harvests. They also show signs of stress, associated, perhaps, with the intensive labor required for plowing, harvesting crops, felling trees, maintaining buildings and fences, and grinding grains. Villages also produced refuse, which attracted vermin, and their populations were large enough to spread diseases that could not have survived in smaller, more nomadic foraging communities. All this evidence of 	suggests that the first farmers were pushed into the complex and increasingly interconnected farming lifeway rather than pulled by its advantages.
* forager: 수렵채집인 ** refuse: 쓰레기 *** vermin: 해충

① declining health	② fading authority
③ weakening kinship	④ expanding hierarchy
⑤ prevailing immorality




32. One study showed that a certain word (e.g., boat) seemed more pleasant when presented after related words (e.g., sea,
sail). That result occurred because of conceptual fluency, a type of processing fluency related to how easily information comes  to  our  mind.  Because  “sea”  primed  the  context,  the heightened predictability caused the concept of “boat” to enter people’s  minds  more  easily,  and  that  ease  of  processing produced a pleasant feeling that became misattributed to the word  “boat.”  Marketers  can  take  advantage  of  conceptual fluency and enhance the effectiveness of their advertisements by strategically 	. For example, an experiment showed that consumers found a ketchup ad more favorable when the ad was presented after an ad  for  mayonnaise.  The  mayonnaise  ad  primed  consumers’ schema for condiments, and when the ad for ketchup was presented afterward, the idea of ketchup came to their minds more easily. As a result of that heightened conceptual fluency, consumers developed a more positive attitude toward the ketchup advertisement.

(A) (B)	(C)
① avoided	…… decorative …… complexity
② avoided	…… functional …… complexity
③ avoided	…… functional  …… simplicity
④ embraced …… functional  …… simplicity
⑤ embraced …… decorative …… simplicity

* prime: 준비시키다 ** condiment: 양념

① breaking the fixed pattern of typical commercials
② expressing their genuine concern for consumers
③ exposing consumers to related scientific data
④ providing a full description of their products
⑤ positioning their ads in predictive contexts




6	영어	영역

3 . Any discussion	of	coevolution	quickly runs	into what
philosophers call a “causality dilemma,” a problem we recognize from the question, “Which came first, the chicken or the egg?” For bees and flowers, we know that both sides arrived at the party well-prepared for dancing. Branched hairs apparently complemented a bee’s taste for pollen from the earliest stage of their evolution. On the botanical side, plants had long been experimenting with insect pollination, attracting dance partners with nectar or edible blossoms. Lack of fossil evidence makes it impossible to run the movie backward and watch the first steps of the dance unfold, but modern studies suggest that
 	. When researchers changed monkeyflowers from pink to orange, for example, pollinator visits shifted from bumblebees to hummingbirds. A similar experiment on South American petunias showed that the flower could trade in bees for hawk moths by altering the activity of a single gene. These findings confirm that relatively simple steps in floral evolution can have dramatic consequences for pollinators. [3점]
* pollen: 꽃가루 ** monkeyflower: 물꽈리아재비(꽈리 꽃의 일종)

① plants are often the ones taking the lead
② bees are the most suitable partner for plants
③ pollinators manipulate plants to join the dance
④ the scents of plants have nothing to do with pollination
⑤ animals visit the same type of plants on a regular basis






34. There is good evidence that the current obesity crisis is caused,
in part, not by what we eat (though this is of course vital, too) but by the degree to which 	. It is sometimes referred to as the “Calorie Delusion.” In 2003, scientists at Kyushu University in Japan fed hard food pellets to one group of rats and softer pellets to another group. In every other respect the pellets were identical: same nutrients, same calories. After twenty-two weeks, the rats on the soft-food diet had become obese, showing that texture is an important factor in weight gain. Further studies involving pythons (eating ground cooked steak versus intact raw steak) confirmed these findings. When we eat chewier, less processed foods, it takes us more energy to digest them, so the number of calories our body receives is less. You will get more energy from a slow-cooked apple pur?e than a crunchy raw apple, even if the calories on paper are identical. [3점]
* python: 비단뱀

① our emotions affect our body as we digest it
② our food has been processed before we eat it
③ our body has absorbed and used essential nutrients
④ we perceive obesity as a critical threat to our health
⑤ we have identified hidden nutritional information in it

35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Some of the things we profess to value in the abstract may not, in fact, characterize our actual everyday experiences. ① For instance, we say that “honesty” and “open communication” are the foundational values of any strong relationship. ② But think of how many times you’ve lied to a potential romantic partner in order to make the person feel better about himself or herself. ③ Likewise, every parent knows that lying to their kids about everything from the arrival of Santa Claus to the horrible things that will happen if they don’t eat their peas is a key component of raising a child. ④ This is because most parents put more value on discipline than on blind love, and thus honest conversations rather than well-intentioned lies are the better tool for establishing solid relationship between parents and their kids. ⑤ As one author put it, “If you want to have love in your  life,  you’d  better  be  prepared  to  tell  some  lies  and  to believe some lies.”
* profess: 주장하다







[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.



(A) A diet poor in vitamin C makes iron absorption difficult, often leading to the double bad luck of scurvy and anemia. Just imagine that combination. It’s bad enough that you are pale and exhausted, but you could also lose muscle tone and begin bleeding internally.
(B) By combining sources of iron with sources of vitamin C, they can ensure that their bodies are better able to absorb both. A large dose of vitamin C can increase iron absorption sixfold. Unfortunately, the opposite is also true.
(C) Vegetarians in developed countries avoid these fatal symptoms because they have access to many foods that are high in both iron and vitamin C, such as broccoli and spinach. Poor people in the developing world are usually less fortunate, however, as those key foods are often precious and strictly seasonal.
* scurvy: 괴혈병 ** anemia: 빈혈증

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어	영역	7
37.	39.




(A) He would of course bet in favor of himself. In doing so, he will receive both a positive incentive to complete the task (his desire to collect the reward for winning the bet) and a negative disincentive to quit the task (his desire to avoid having to pay out if he loses).
(B) A bet is a typical example of this. A person striving to reach a difficult goal or complete a task ― building a rocking chair or losing weight, for instance ― will be wise to supplement his motivation to do so by making a bet on it with a friend.
(C) It is, however, possible for a person to personally manipulate and create consequences for his actions. This will inevitably have an effect on his future motivation and behavior. Most often this is achieved through the imposition of monetary consequences. [3점]
* monetary: 금전적인

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)





[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.




　Children are born theorizers. Their minds are never idle and, once they start talking, their mouths aren’t, either. When their use of a word strikes us as odd, we correct them. ( ① ) They learn the meanings of words by trial and error, by hypothesizing a fit between word and object and using the feedback they get from others to refine the abstract category for which the word stands. ( ② ) But of course, those others were once children themselves, and they learned language in the same way. ( ③ ) Rather, words acquire objective meanings because of the “pull” exerted by social pressures to conform to publicly approved usage. ( ④ ) Therefore every category, every concept of ours is a work in progress. ( ⑤ ) No two of us learn our language alike, and nobody finishes learning it while he lives. [3점]

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　You don’t worry because you care; you worry because that is what you have learned to do. Worry is a very creative mental process. The questions you ask in your mind create your worries. If you ask ‘what if’ questions, you set your mind up to worry. ( ① ) You may consistently ask, “What if I lose my job? What if I crash my car? What if criminals attack me?” ( ② ) All these  ‘what  if’  phrases  create  ‘movies’  in  your  mind  that constantly repeat different scenarios, which creates a state of worry. ( ③ ) The movies that are created by these questions don’t trap you into worry. ( ④ ) They give you action steps that direct your mind. ( ⑤ ) Create a procedure for different


?



(A)	(B)
① describing …… facilitates
② describing …… impairs
③ verbalizing …… reinforces
④ correcting …… enhances

scenarios and make peace with your thinking.

⑤ correcting

…… undermines




8	영어	영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




(B)













(C)












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Secret Behind Brain Size: Social Interaction
② How Collective Intelligence Works for Survival
③ Biodiversity: A New Opportunity for Evolution
④ The Light and Dark Sides of Being Social
⑤ What Makes Being Sociable So Difficult?

42. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(D)
　The little girl saw the oncoming alligator. She turned around and started swimming back as fast as she could. Just as she was about to get out of the lake, two things happened at the same time. The mother grabbed her arms, doing (d) her best to pull the little girl out of the water, and the alligator bit into her legs. What happened next was a struggle between the mother and the beast. The alligator was very strong, but so was (e) her love. She simply wouldn’t let go.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4 . 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 소녀의 어머니는 소녀가 수영하는 것을 보았다.
② 소녀는 자신의 팔에 생긴 상처를 자랑스러워했다.
③ 소녀의 어머니는 악어를 총으로 쏘았다.
④ 기자가 소녀에게 상처 사진을 찍어도 되는지 물어봤다.
⑤ 소녀가 호수 밖으로 나오려는 순간 악어에게 다리를 물렸다.




2020학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① They’ll let me know in a week.
② I’m excited to watch the musical.
③ I posted the results on the website.
④ I finally got the main role I wanted.
⑤ They’ll start the audition in 10 minutes.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Absolutely. You don’t need it tomorrow.
② Alright. I’ll return it to you this evening.
③ I know. But I haven’t fixed mine yet.
④ Don’t worry. You can repair it easily.
⑤ Sorry. I couldn’t go to the workshop.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 회사 발전 계획을 발표하려고
② 직원 연수 일정을 안내하려고
③ 우수 직원상 신청을 권장하려고
④ 신입 사원 세미나를 공지하려고
⑤ 직장 근무 환경 개선을 촉구하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 글씨체를 통해 사람의 성격을 파악할 수 있다.
② 컴퓨터 사용이 고객 관리에 도움이 된다.
③ 손으로 쓴 편지는 사람을 감동시킨다.
④ 신뢰 관계는 좋은 첫인상에서 비롯된다.
⑤ 글쓰기 능력은 꾸준한 노력을 통해 향상된다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 화가 － 패션모델
② 소설가 － 출판업자
③ 사진작가 － 요리사
④ 영화감독 － 만화가
⑤ 작곡가 － 신문 기자


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 행사 광고지 인쇄하기
② 행사용 선물 주문하기
③ 사인회 작가에게 연락하기
④ 할인 행사용 도서 진열하기
⑤ 회원에게 문자 메시지 보내기

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 농구 경기를 보러 가지 못한 이유를 고르시오.
① 야근을 해야 했기 때문에
② 티켓이 매진되었기 때문에
③ 딸을 돌보아야 했기 때문에
④ 경기 일정이 변경되었기 때문에
⑤ 갑자기 출장을 가야 했기 때문에

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36	② $40	③ $45	④ $50	⑤ $60

10. 대화를 듣고, 학생회장 선거에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 선거 일자	② 후보자 공약	③ 후보 자격
④ 연설 장소	⑤ 투표 방법

11. Sunstone City Library에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 8월 5일에 개관한다.
② Kingsbury Museum을 설계한 건축가가 설계했다.
③ 가상현실 기기를 무료로 사용할 수 있다.
④ Sunstone City에서 가장 많은 도서를 보유하고 있다.
⑤ 개관일에 방문객에게 선물을 줄 예정이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 그림 액자를 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Picture Frames

①
②
③
④
⑤


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Thanks a lot. I hope he can help me out.
② No thanks. He’s the last man I want to see.
③ Trust me. I’ll keep the sound system updated.
④ That’s fine. You’ll learn from your experience.
⑤ Cheer up! You’ll get another chance next time.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Okay. I’ll ask her to buy some shrimp on her way home.
② Great idea. Turkey sandwiches are always my favorite.
③ Yes. I’ll take the shrimp pasta to her workplace now.
④ Good. Let me recommend several good restaurants.
⑤ No wonder. She took the day off from work today.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Peter가 Peter의 할머니에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Peter:   	
① I’m worried that you use your smartphone too much.
② Let me explain how to download apps on your phone.
③ Why don’t you share your photos with your classmates?
④ How about taking a smartphone class at the senior center?
⑤ I’d better buy you a new smartphone with a larger screen.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① unique museums around the world
② the history of world-class museums
③ cultural festivals in different countries
④ worldwide efforts to preserve heritage
⑤ international etiquette of museum visitors

17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① USA	② Egypt	③ India
④ Japan	⑤ Mexico







① 항공 비행 캠프 변경 사항을 알리려고
② 항공 비행 캠프 개최에 대해 안내하려고
③ 항공 조종사 자격시험 장소를 공지하려고
④ 항공 조종사 면허 신청 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 항공 비행 캠프 참여자 선정 결과를 통보하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Claire의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? It was two hours before the paper submission. With the deadline close at hand, Claire was still struggling with her
writing. Pressed for time and stuck in a deadlock, she had no idea how to finish the paper. She wasn’t even sure whether she could submit it on time. What she found in her paper was scribbled words, half sentences, and a pile of seemingly strange and disjointed ideas. “Nothing makes sense,” she said to herself. She looked at her writing and began reading it over and over. All of a sudden and unexpectedly, something was found in   that pile of thoughts: the flow and connection of ideas she had not considered while she was writing. From this moment, the ticking of the clock sounded encouraging to her. “Yes, I can do it!” Claire said as she grabbed her pencil again.
* scribble: 휘갈겨 쓰다
① delighted  → ashamed	② relieved → worried
③ nervous → confident ④ indifferent → excited
⑤ bored → embarrassed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Learning a certain concept such as “molecules” requires more than just a single exposure to the idea. If a student is going to remember a science concept, he or she should experience it multiple times and in various contexts. That is one of the strengths of the learning cycle: the students have direct experience with the concept, then they talk about it, and then they have even more direct experience. Reading, watching videos, and listening to others’ thoughts contribute to a more solid understanding of the concept. This suggests more than repetition. Each event allows the student to examine the concept from a different perspective. Ultimately this will lead to a substantive, useful understanding of the complexities and nuances of the concept.
① 과학 개념을 학습하려면 다양한 방식으로 여러 번 접해야 한다.
② 복잡한 과학 개념을 이해하기 위해서는 암기가 선행되어야 한다.
③ 효과적인 과학 학습을 위해 기본 개념을 숙지할 필요가 있다.
④ 과학 원리는 쉬운 것부터 어려운 것 순으로 가르쳐야 한다.
⑤ 다양한 시각 자료를 활용하여 과학 수업을 진행해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 “Garbage in, garbage out”이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Many companies confuse activities and results. As a consequence, they make the mistake of designing a process  that sets out milestones in the form of activities that must be carried out during the sales cycle. Salespeople have a genius for doing what’s compensated rather than what’s effective. If your process has an activity such as “submit proposal” or “make cold call,” then that’s just what your people will do. No matter that the calls were to the wrong customer or went nowhere. No matter that the proposal wasn’t submitted at the right point in the buying decision or contained inappropriate information. The process asked for activity, and activity was what it got. Salespeople have done what was asked for. “Garbage in, garbage out” they will delight in telling you. “It’s not our problem, it’s this dumb process.”
① In seeking results, compensation is the key to quality.
② Salespeople should join in a decision-making process.
③ Shared understanding does not always result in success.
④ Activities drawn from false information produce failure.
⑤ Processes focused on activities end up being ineffective.








22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The twenty-first century is the age of information and knowledge. It is a century that is characterized by knowledge as the important resource that gains competitive advantage for companies. To acquire all these knowledge and information, organizations must rely on the data that they store. Data, the basic element, is gathered daily from different input sources. Information is extracted or learned from these sources of data, and this captured information is then transformed into knowledge that is eventually used to trigger actions or decisions. By and large, organizations do not have any problem of not having enough data because most organizations are rich with data. The problem however is that many organizations are poor in information and knowledge. This fact translates into one of the biggest challenges faced by organizations: how to transform raw data into information and eventually into knowledge, which if exploited correctly provides the capabilities to predict customers’ behaviour and business trends.
① 고객의 특성은 기업의 데이터 처리 과정에서 주요 고려 사항이다.
② 성공하는 기업은 사실에 기반한 판단을 통해 위기를 극복한다.
③ 기업 경쟁력은 데이터를 정보와 지식으로 변환하는 능력에서 나온다.
④ 지식 정보화 시대에는 기초 데이터 확보의 중요성이 커지고 있다.
⑤ 데이터의 가치는 그것이 가지는 잠재적 수익성에 의해 결정된다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In the twelfth to thirteenth centuries there appeared the first manuals teaching “table manners” to the offspring of aristocrats. It was a genre that subsequently had a great success in the  early modern period with The Courtier by Baldassare Castiglione, The Galateo by Monsignor Della Casa, and many others produced in different European countries. In a variety of ways and meanings, these are all instruments intended to define or distinguish who is in from who is out, separating the participants from the ostracized. It is for this reason that manuals of “good manners” addressed to the aristocracy always have a negative reference to the peasant who behaves badly, who “doesn’t know” what the rules are, and for this reason is excluded from the lordly table. Food etiquette had become a sign of social barriers and of the impossibility of breaking them down.
* aristocrat: 귀족 ** ostracize: 추방하다
① table manners as a marker for class distinction
② publications to bring about equality between classes
③ unintended effects of distinguishing insiders from outsiders
④ attempts to elaborate food etiquette for educational purposes
⑤ roles of manners in uniting people from different backgrounds






24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Racial and ethnic relations in the United States are better today than in the past, but many changes are needed before sports are a model of inclusion and fairness. The challenges today are different from the ones faced twenty years ago, and experience shows that when current challenges are met, a new social situation is created in  which new challenges emerge.  For example, once racial and ethnic segregation is eliminated and people come together, they must learn to live, work, and play with each other despite diverse experiences and cultural perspectives. Meeting this challenge requires a commitment to equal treatment, plus learning about the perspectives of others, understanding how they define and give meaning to the world, and then determining how to form and maintain relationships while respecting differences, making compromises, and supporting one another in the pursuit of goals that may not always be shared. None of this is easy, and challenges  are never met once and for all time.
* segregation: 분리
① On-going Challenges in Sports: Racial and Ethnic Issues
② Racial and Ethnic Injustice in Sports: Cause and Effect
③ The History of Racial and Ethnic Diversity in Sports
④ All for One, One for All: The Power of Team Sports
⑤ Cooperation Lies at the Heart of Sportsmanship


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. 2019 Fitness EXPO에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　The graph above shows the average kilocalorie intake from sugar-sweetened beverages by age group and gender on a given day during 2011-2014 in the United States. ① In each age group,  males  had  higher  average  kilocalorie  intake  from
sugar-sweetened beverages than females did. ② Among the male groups, the group aged 20-39 had the highest average kilocalorie intake from sugar-sweetened beverages. ③ Among the  female  groups,  the  group  aged  12-19  had  the  highest
average kilocalorie intake from sugar-sweetened beverages, followed by the group aged 20-39. ④ Among the male groups, the group aged 2-5 had the lowest average kilocalorie intake from sugar-sweetened beverages. ⑤ Among the female groups, likewise, the youngest group had the lowest average kilocalorie
intake from sugar-sweetened beverages.







26. Great Bear Rainforest에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Along the coast of British Columbia lies a land of forest green and sparkling blue. This land is the Great Bear Rainforest, which measures 6.4 million hectares ― about the size of Ireland or Nova Scotia. It is home to a wide variety of wildlife. One of the unique animals living in the area is the Kermode bear. It is a rare kind of bear known to be the official mammal of British Columbia. Salmon are also found here. They play a vital role in this area’s ecosystem as a wide range of animals, as well as humans, consume them. The Great Bear Rainforest is also home to the Western Red Cedar, a tree that can live for  several  hundred years. The tree’s wood is lightweight and rot-resistant, so it is used for making buildings and furniture.
① British Columbia의 해안가를 따라 위치한다.
② Ireland와 Nova Scotia를 합친 크기이다.
③ Kermode 곰이 살고 있다.
④ 연어는 이 지역 생태계에서 중요한 역할을 한다.
⑤ Western Red Cedar의 서식지이다.

2019 Fitness EXPO
　The 2019 Fitness EXPO is an annual event where you can experience new wellness products and enjoy fitness classes, competitions, and a lot more.
Dates & Time: June 22-23, 2019, 10:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m.
Place: Healfit Convention Hall
Admission: One-day Pass $10 / Two-day Pass $18 (Ages 12 and under enter for FREE.)
Accommodations
Healfit Hotel offers rooms at a special rate. Please book your stay at www.healfithotel.com.
Activities
?Fitness Classes led by professional trainers
?Arm Wrestling Tournament, where the champion is given a trophy
?Dance Fitness Contest, where only amateurs can participate For further information, visit our website at www.ibeingfit.com.

① 새로 나온 건강 제품을 체험할 수 있다.
② 12세 이하는 무료입장이다.
③ Healfit Hotel이 객실을 특별가로 제공한다.
④ 팔씨름 토너먼트 챔피언에게는 트로피가 수여된다.
⑤ 댄스 피트니스 경연은 전문가들이 참가할 수 있다.

28. 2019 Mountain Today Wildflower Photo Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

2019 Mountain Today Wildflower Photo Contest
　Mountain Today is hosting a photo contest for local high school students. We want to see your best wildflower photos.
?No Entry Fee
?Submission Deadline: 18:00 on June 7, 2019
?How to Submit: Upload to www.mountaintoday.com.
▣ Submission Categories
?People with Wildflowers
?Landscape with Wildflowers
▣ Prizes
?First Place: $200 for one person from each category
?Second Place: $100 for one person from each category
?Winners will be posted on the website on June 21, 2019.
Individual notifications will also be issued to winners.
▣ Details
?All photos should be uploaded in JPEG format.
?No photo editing is allowed.
?The  total  number  of photos  submitted  is  limited  to  four per student.

① 참가비가 있다.
② 출품 분야는 세 가지이다.
③ 입상자들에게 개별 통지는 하지 않을 것이다.
④ 사진 편집이 허용되지 않는다.
⑤ 학생 1인당 출품 사진 수에 제한이 없다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　An interesting aspect of human psychology is that we tend to like things more and find them more ① appealing if everything about those things is not obvious the first time we experience
them. This is certainly true in music. For example, we might hear a song on the radio for the first time that catches our interest and ② decide we like it. Then the next time we hear it, we hear
a lyric we didn’t catch the first time, or we might notice ③ what
the piano or drums are doing in the background. A special harmony ④ emerges that we missed before. We hear more and more and understand more and more with each listening. Sometimes, the longer ⑤ that takes for a work of art to reveal all of its subtleties to us, the more fond of that thing ― whether it’s music, art, dance, or architecture ― we become.

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. Some people have defined wildlife damage management as the science and management of overabundant species, but this definition is too narrow. All wildlife species act in ways that harm human interests. Thus, all species cause wildlife damage, not just overabundant ones. One interesting example of this involves endangered peregrine falcons in California, which prey on another endangered species, the California least tern. Certainly, we would not consider peregrine falcons as being overabundant, but we wish that they would not feed on an endangered species. In this case, one of the negative values associated with a peregrine falcon population is that its predation reduces the population of another endangered species. The goal of wildlife damage management in this case
would  be  to  stop  the  falcons  from  eating  the  terns without

* subtleties: 중요한 세부 요소[사항]들	 	the falcons.
* peregrine falcon: 송골매 ** least tern: 작은 제비갈매기
① cloning	② harming	③ training
④ overfeeding	⑤ domesticating



















30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Sometimes the awareness that one is distrusted can provide the necessary incentive for self-reflection. An employee who
① realizes  she  isn’t  being  trusted  by  her  co-workers   with
shared responsibilities at work might, upon reflection, identify areas where she has consistently let others down or failed to follow through on previous commitments. Others’ distrust of her might then ② forbid her to perform her share of the duties
in a way that makes her more worthy of their trust. But distrust
of one who is ③ sincere in her efforts to be a trustworthy and dependable person can be disorienting and might cause her to doubt her own perceptions and to distrust herself. Consider,
for instance, a teenager whose parents are ④ suspicious and distrustful when she goes out at night; even if she has been forthright about her plans and is not ⑤ breaking any agreed-upon rules, her identity as a respectable moral subject
is undermined by a pervasive parental attitude that expects deceit and betrayal.
* forthright: 솔직한, 거리낌 없는 ** pervasive: 널리 스며 있는
32. 
Through recent decades academic archaeologists have been urged to conduct their research and excavations according to hypothesis-testing procedures. It has been argued that we should construct our general theories, deduce testable propositions and prove or disprove them against the sampled data. In fact, the application of this ‘scientific method’ often ran into difficulties. The data have a tendency to lead to unexpected questions, problems and issues. Thus, archaeologists claiming to follow hypothesis-testing procedures found themselves having to create a fiction. In practice, their work and theoretical conclusions partly developed 	. In other words, they already knew the data when they decided upon an interpretation. But in presenting their work they rewrote the script, placing the theory first and claiming to have tested it against data which they discovered, as in an experiment under laboratory conditions.
* excavation: 발굴 ** deduce: 추론하다
① from the data which they had discovered
② from comparisons of data in other fields
③ to explore more sites for their future studies
④ by supposing possible theoretical frameworks
⑤ by observing the hypothesis-testing procedures


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Digital technology accelerates dematerialization by hastening the migration from products to services. The liquid nature of services means they don’t have to be bound to materials. But dematerialization is not just about digital goods. The reason even solid physical goods ― like a soda can ― can deliver more benefits while inhabiting less material is because their heavy atoms are substituted by weightless bits. The tangible is replaced by intangibles ― intangibles like better design, innovative processes, smart chips, and eventually online connectivity ― that do the work that more aluminum atoms used to do. Soft things, like intelligence, are thus embedded into hard things, like aluminum, that make hard things behave more
like software. Material goods infused with bits increasingly act as if 	. Nouns morph to verbs. Hardware behaves like software. In Silicon Valley they say it like this: “Software eats everything.” [3점]
* morph: 변화하다
① they were intangible services
② they replaced all digital goods
③ hardware could survive software
④ digital services were not available
⑤ software conflicted with hardware









34. Not all Golden Rules are alike; two kinds emerged over time. The negative version instructs restraint; the positive encourages intervention. One sets a baseline of at least not causing harm; the other points toward aspirational or idealized beneficent behavior. While examples of these rules abound, too many to list exhaustively, let these versions suffice for our purpose here: “What is hateful to you do not do to another” and “Love another as yourself.” Both versions insist on caring for others, whether through acts of omission, such as not injuring, or through acts of commission, by actively intervening. Yet while these Golden Rules encourage an agent to care for an other, they 	. The purposeful displacement of concern away from the ego nonetheless remains partly self-referential. Both the negative and the positive versions invoke the ego as the fundamental measure against which behaviors are to be evaluated. [3점]
* an other: 타자(他者)
① do not lead the self to act on concerns for others
② reveal inner contradiction between the two versions
③ fail to serve as a guide when faced with a moral dilemma
④ do not require abandoning self-concern altogether
⑤ hardly consider the benefits of social interactions
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　When a dog is trained to detect drugs, explosives, contraband, or other items, the trainer doesn’t actually teach the dog how  to smell; the dog already knows how to discriminate one scent from another. Rather, the dog is trained to become emotionally aroused  by  one  smell  versus  another.  ① In  the step-by-step
training process, the trainer attaches an “emotional charge” to
a particular scent so that the dog is drawn to it  above  all others. ② And then the dog is trained to search out the desired item on cue, so that the trainer can control or release the behavior. ③ This emotional arousal is also why playing tug with a dog is a more powerful emotional reward in a training regime than just giving a dog a food treat, since the trainer
invests more emotion into a game of tug. ④ As long as the trainer gives the dog a food reward regularly, the dog can understand its “good” behavior results in rewards. ⑤ From a dog’s point of view, the tug toy is compelling because the trainer is “upset” by the toy.
* contraband: 밀수품 ** tug: 잡아당김




[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) Written notes freeze the music rather than allowing it to develop in the hands of individuals, and it discourages improvisation. Partly because of notation, modern classical performance lacks the depth of nuance that is part of aural tradition. Before notation arrived, in all history music was largely carried on as an aural tradition.
(B) It changed the nature of the art itself. To write something down means that people far away in space and time can re-create it. At the same time, there are downsides.
(C) Most world music is still basically aural, including sophisticated musical traditions such as Indian and Balinese. Most jazz musicians can read music but often don’t bother, and their art is much involved with improvisation. Many modern pop musicians, one example being Paul McCartney, can’t read music at all.
* improvisation: 즉흥 연주 ** aural: 청각의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 

　Marshall McLuhan, among others, noted that clothes are people’s extended skin, wheels extended feet, camera and telescopes extended eyes. Our technological creations are great extrapolations of the bodies that our genes build.

(A) The blueprints for our shells spring from our minds, which may spontaneously create something none of our ancestors ever made or even imagined. If technology is an extension of humans, it is not an extension of our genes but of our minds. Technology is therefore the extended body for ideas.
(B) In this way, we can think of technology as our extended body. During the industrial age it was easy to see the world this way. Steam-powered shovels, locomotives, television, and the levers and gears of engineers were a fabulous exoskeleton that turned man into superman.
(C) A closer look reveals the flaw in this analogy: The extended costume of animals is the result of their genes. They inherit the basic blueprints of what they make. Humans don’t. [3점]
* extrapolation: 연장(延長) ** exoskeleton: 외골격 *** flaw: 결함
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38. 
39. 


That puts you each near a focus, a special point at which  the sound of your voice gets focused as it reflects off the passageway’s curved walls and ceiling.
　Whispering galleries are remarkable acoustic spaces found beneath certain domes or curved ceilings. A famous one is located outside a well-known restaurant in New York City’s Grand Central Station. (  ① ) It’s  a fun place to take a date:  the two of you can exchange romantic words while you’re  forty feet apart and separated by a busy passageway. ( ② ) You’ll hear each other clearly, but the passersby won’t hear a word you’re saying. ( ③ ) To produce this effect, the two of you should stand at diagonally opposite corners of the space, facing the wall. ( ④ ) Ordinarily, the sound waves you  produce travel in all directions and bounce off the walls at different times and places, scrambling them so much that they are inaudible when they arrive at the ear of a listener forty feet away. ( ⑤ ) But when you whisper at a focus, the reflected waves all arrive at the same time at the other focus, thus reinforcing one another and allowing your words to be heard.
[3점]
* acoustic: 음향의 ** diagonally: 대각선으로

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　We seek out feel-good experiences, always on the lookout for the next holiday, purchase or culinary experience. This approach to happiness is relatively recent; it depends on our capacity both to pad our lives with material pleasures and to feel that we can control our suffering. ( ① ) Painkillers, as we know them today,
are a relatively recent invention and access to material comfort is
now within reach of a much larger proportion of the world’s population. ( ② ) These technological and economic advances have had significant cultural implications, leading us to see our negative experiences as a problem and maximizing our positive experiences  as  the  answer.  (  ③ ) Yet,  through  this  we have
forgotten that being happy in life is not just about pleasure. ( ④ )
Comfort, contentment and satisfaction have never been the elixir of happiness. ( ⑤ ) Happiness is there, on the edges of these experiences, and when we get a glimpse of that kind of happiness it is powerful, transcendent and compelling.
* culinary: 요리의 ** elixir: 특효약 *** transcendent: 뛰어난













(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① pretended …… actualize	② pretended …… disregard
③ refused	…… realize	④ refused	…… idealize
⑤ attempted …… mask


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)












(C)
(D)














41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① A Road to Becoming a Great Political Philosopher
② Toward Genuine Liberty, Beyond Fear and Violence
③ Moralistic Approach in Politics: In Pursuit of Ideal Values
④ How to Identify the Historical Root of Political Moralists
⑤ Why Philosophers Tend to Be Moralists: The Fate of Philosophy

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Joe는 바이올린에 천부적인 재능이 있었다.
② Master Brooks는 Joe가 속한 밴드의 연습을 보러 갔다.
③ Master Brooks는 크로스오버 음악에 대한 자신의 견해를 바꾸었다.
④ Joe가 속한 밴드는 두 명의 연주자로 구성되었다.
⑤ Joe는 수업이 끝난 후에 아버지와 단둘이 대화를 나눴다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2018학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That sounds good for a change.
② That was a great romance movie.
③ Isn’t it expensive to watch a movie?
④ I have a meeting tonight, so I can’t come.
⑤ As you know, I don’t like watching movies.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m proud of him. It’s a great accomplishment.
② That’s true. He won’t come to the meeting.
③ Too bad. Then the flight will be delayed.
④ Not at all. Flying is safer than driving.
⑤ Of course. I’ll text you about it.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 도서관의 디지털 자료 사용을 권장하려고
② 도서관 자원봉사자 모집 계획을 알리려고
③ 학교 전산망 시설 공사 일정을 공지하려고
④ 디지털 콘텐츠 개발의 필요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 자료 검색용 컴퓨터 이용 방법을 안내하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 Mark를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 숙소 알아보기	② 기차표 구매하기
③ 손님방 청소하기	④ 구직 면접 주선하기
⑤ 호텔 예약 취소하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 오늘 프로젝터를 사용하지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 부품이 고장 나서
② 연결 케이블이 없어서
③ 컴퓨터실이 정전되어서
④ 친구로부터 돌려받지 못해서
⑤ 프레젠테이션 장소가 너무 좁아서


9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $85	② $100	③ $105	④ $130	⑤ $135


10.대화를 듣고,  과학 프로젝트에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르 시오.


① 놀이를 통해 갈등 해결 능력을 기를 수 있다.
② 칭찬과 격려가 자녀의 행동 교정에 효과적이다.① 연구 주제
③ 평가 기준② 팀원 수
④ 발표 날짜③ 부모는 자녀에게 사과의 중요성을 가르쳐야 한다.
④ 가정 내 규율은 부모와 자녀가 함께 정해야 한다.⑤ 사용 가능한 소프트웨어⑤ 자녀를 훈육할 때 일관성을 유지하는 것이 중요하다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 요리 강사 - 수강생	② 영양 교사 - 학생회장
③ 방송 기자 - 통계 분석가	④ 여론 조사 전문가 - 의뢰인
⑤ 식품 위생 감시원 - 음식점 주인

1.Tapas Cooking Class에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월 15일부터 3일 동안 진행된다.
② 식료품 시장을 방문하는 일정이 포함되어 있다.
③ 다양한 올리브유를 맛볼 기회가 있다.
④ 수강료와 별도로 재료비를 내야 한다.
⑤ 수강 인원은 10명 이내로 제한된다.


	

2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  주문할  토스터  오
븐을 고르시오.

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Top 5 Toaster Ovens


①
②
③
④
⑤


13.대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I think it’s too far from our school.
② Right. Let’s put off the competition.
③ We don’t rent out our school auditorium.
④ Okay. Let’s hold the competition on campus.
⑤ I already did. The hall is available that day.

14.대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Thanks. It’s lovely of you to make chocolate for me.
② Yes. Just put it in a bowl and heat it in hot water.
③ No. Your recipe was okay, but I made a mistake.
④ You did an excellent job making this chocolate.
⑤ That’s fine. I can make chocolate on my own.

15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Melanie가 Jake에게 할 말로 가장 적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Melanie:  	
① You’ll even be fined if you don’t wear one.
② Sure. Biking is time­efficient for a short trip.
③ Preparation is important. Let’s check our lists.
④ You should adjust the helmet so that it fits you.
⑤ It’ll be a long­distance ride. A helmet is a must.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects of colors on household energy use
② roles of colors in inspiring creative ideas
③ relationship between colors and moods
④ using vivid colors for home decoration
⑤ preferred colors for home appliances

17.언급된 색상이 아닌 것은?
① black	② white	③ purple	④ blue	⑤ orange








① 직원의 사직을 만류하려고
② 불편을 겪은 고객에게 사과하려고
③ 갑작스러운 인사이동을 해명하려고
④ 회사의 인원 감축 계획을 알리려고
⑤ 부서 내 업무 조정 내용을 설명하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 As Farish and I walked, brown sandstones gave way to pink limestones, which was a promising sign that fossils were in the neighborhood. After we spent a few minutes peering at rocks, alarm bells went off; my attention was pulled to an unusual faint light flashing from a corner of a melon­sized rock. My heart pounded hard. Experience in the field taught me to respect the sensation triggered by these moments. I spent about five minutes curled up with the rock close to my eyes before passing it to Farish for his expert opinion. Farish froze solid. His eyes shot back to me with a look of suppressed emotion, disbelief, and surprise. “Yes, we found it!” I cried. Jumping with joy, I hugged him.
① hopeful  → delighted	② worried → grateful
③ terrified → relieved	④ excited → disappointed
⑤ nervous → sympathetic

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 You know the old saying about having only one chance to make a first impression? Forget about it for once and give people a second chance. Even if you didn’t like someone’s question at yesterday’s lecture or you thought his outfit was out­of­place for the event, don’t immediately write that person off as a potential friend. This is a time in your life to dig deeper and allow yourself to find out what makes people behave the way they do. Forget about surfaces and look for what’s inside. And remember, it takes time for new friendships to develop. As you get to know each other, shared experiences and interests will become woven into the friendship. Keep working on the relationship, even if it feels uncomfortable at times.
① 사고의 폭을 넓히려면 다양한 사람들과 교류하라.
② 친구의 단점을 지적하기보다 장점을 찾아 칭찬하라.
③ 인기 있는 사람이 되려면 먼저 자신의 인격을 기르라.
④ 처음 만난 사람에게 지나치게 개인적인 질문을 삼가라.
⑤ 친구를 사귀려면 내면의 모습에 주목하여 꾸준히 노력하라.


	

영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 When science is examined as an enterprise that involves the values of independence, freedom, the right to dissent, and tolerance, it is clear that as a social activity science cannot flourish in an authoritarian climate. Some philosophers of science such as Bronowski claim that science cannot be practiced in authoritarian regimes. In a democratic environment, old ideas can be challenged and rigorously criticized, although with some difficulty because of the human desire to hold onto old ideas, especially by the original proposers. Yet it is the essence of scientific thinking to propose alternative ideas and then to test them against existing concepts. As pointed out in an American Association for the Advancement of Science report, Science for All Americans,   “indeed, challenges to new ideas are  the legitimate business of science in building valid knowledge.”
① 과학의 권위는 이론의 검증과 적용을 통해 확립된다.
② 철학의 추론 기법은 다양한 과학 연구에 응용될 수 있다.
③ 과학 탐구의 방향은 공동체의 정치적인 지향을 반영한다.
④ 기존의 지식에서 새로운 아이디어의 실마리를 찾을 수 있다.
⑤ 민주적 환경에서 과학은 타당한 지식을 형성하는 데 기여한다.









2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Considering the multitude of ways people benefit from insects, it is curious that insects continue to suffer from such an unfavorable reputation. Ironically, while many of us perceive insects as harmful pests ― dangerous, ugly, and disease­ridden ― in reality, without the service of pollination which they provide humankind might cease to exist. The promotion of negative stereotypes of insects can be largely traced to failure by Europeans to appreciate or understand the customs of the lands they colonized and their misperception that the way of life of most indigenous populations they encountered was barbaric. Many people’s dislike for insects stems from a similar classist attitude that associates insects with indigenous people who lack the means to buy or grow alternate sources of food. Again this prejudice stems largely from Western cultures. In contrast, cultures of many Eastern nations such as Japan and China consider various species of insects to be great delicacies.
* pollination: 가루받이 ** indigenous: 원주민의
① efforts to control pests using natural enemies
② untapped potential of insects as a food source
③ cultural reasons for people’s dislike for insects
④ prejudices against insects based on their appearance
⑤ various roles of insects in supporting the eco­system

23.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Through evolution, our brains have developed to deal with acute dangers, whether saber­toothed cats or thunderstorms. Our nerve connections will ensure that we become aware of the dangers and react to them to protect ourselves, being alerted by their peculiar smell, their threatening looks, or their scary noise. But nothing in our past has prepared us to deal with the insidious chemical threats that endanger the development of the next generation’s brains. On the contrary, we are thoroughly enjoying the immediate benefits of attractive consumer goods, efficient technologies, and handsome profits that we generate from producing and disseminating hazardous chemicals. Our senses are not geared toward detecting the underlying dangers. The irony is that the resulting harm to the brain may wipe out some of those senses that we badly need to manage this very problem.
* insidious: 모르는 사이에 진행되는 ** disseminate: 퍼뜨리다
① Chemicals as a Blessing in Disguise
② Under Undetectable Attack by Chemicals
③ Brain Chemicals: Traces of Human Evolution
④ Chemical Signals: Brain’s Communication Tools
⑤ Beyond Biological Evolution to Chemical Evolution





24.다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


 The table above displays the new yearly investment in renewable energy technology around the world measured every other year from 2006 to 2016. ① For each measured year, the total new investment in renewable energy technology was more than 220 billion U.S. dollars from 2010 and on, with its peak at 267.3 billion in 2014. ② Among the six sectors, solar power recorded the biggest difference in new yearly investment between 2006 and 2016, followed by wind power. ③ As for hydropower, newly invested money in 2016 was less than half the amount in 2006. ④ Biofuels had the second most investment among the six sectors in 2006; it had the least investment in 2016. ⑤ New investment in geothermal power remained between 1 billion and 3 billion dollars each measured year; ocean energy attracted less than 1 billion dollars each measured year.




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

25.Eudora Alice  Welty에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
 Eudora Alice Welty was an American short story writer and novelist. She studied at Mississippi State College for Women from 1925 to 1927, then transferred to the University of Wisconsin to complete her studies in English literature. Following her graduation, she studied advertising at Columbia University, but soon had to return home due to lack of work during the Great Depression. In 1931, she worked as a writer for a local radio station in her hometown Jackson, Mississippi, where she gained a wider view of Southern life for her short stories. Her first short story was published in 1936, and thereafter her work began to appear regularly in magazines.    Her    novel   The      Optimist’s             Daughter            won   the Pulitzer Prize in 1973 and she was the first living author to have her works published by the Library of America. Her house in Jackson has been designated as a National Historic Landmark and is open to the public as a museum.
① Wisconsin 대학에서 영문학을 공부했다.
② 고향의 지역 라디오 방송국에서 일자리를 구했다.
③ 첫 단편 소설 출판 후 작품이 정기적으로 잡지에 실렸다.
④ 희곡을 출판하여 1973년에 Pulitzer상을 받았다.
⑤ Jackson에 있는 자택은 박물관으로 개방되어 있다.

26.2018  Kinetic  Derby  Day에  관한 다음  안내문의  내용과  일치 하지 않는 것은?

27.Grantshire  Charity  Yard  Sale에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과
일치하는 것은?


Grantshire Charity Yard Sale

Are there any items in your house that you don’t use anymore? Join us in our annual charity yard sale.
When: Saturdays in November, 1:00 p.m. ? 5:00 p.m. Where: Grantshire Community Center Front Yard
If you want to be a seller, you MUST
- register on our community website by October 20.
- pay $10 for registration.
- donate at least 3 items to the community booth.

Note:
- All registration fees and donated items will go to the local homeless shelters.
- Free pick­up services for donations are available upon request.
For inquiries and registration, please visit us at www.grantshirecc.org.


① 11월에 매주 토요일 오전에 진행된다.
② 판매자 등록은 10월 21일에 시작된다.
③ 판매자는 등록비 10달러를 내야 한다.
④ 등록비는 지역 노인 복지 회관에 전액 기부된다.
⑤ 기부 물품에 대한 픽업 서비스는 유료로 제공된다.



















① 퍼레이드가 경주보다 먼저 시작된다.
② 모든 차에 모터 사용이 허용되지 않는다.
③ 모든 차는 안전 점검을 통과해야 한다.
④ 경주 참가자는 모두 헬멧을 착용해야 한다.
⑤ 퍼레이드 참가비는 1인당 10달러이다.

28.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
 The Internet allows information to flow more ① freely than ever before. We can communicate and share ideas in unprecedented ways. These developments are revolutionizing our self­expression and enhancing our freedom. But there’s a problem. We’re heading toward a world ② where an extensive trail of information fragments about us will be forever preserved on the Internet, displayed instantly in a search result. We will be forced to live with a detailed record ③ beginning with childhood that will stay with us for life wherever we go, searchable and accessible from anywhere in the world. This data can often be of dubious reliability; it can be false; or it can be true but deeply
④ humiliated. It may be increasingly difficult to have a fresh start or a second chance. We might find ⑤ it harder to engage in self­exploration if every false step and foolish act is preserved forever in a permanent record.
* dubious: 의심스러운


	

영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.다음 글에서 밑줄 친 We  picked a bad year  to have a good year가 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

 On August 12, 1994, major league baseball players went on strike, bringing baseball to a halt for the rest of the season. The strike, which lasted 235 days, ended in April of the next year when a federal judge issued an injunction against the club owners. Just before the strike, baseball was enjoying one of the most exciting seasons in many years. The lowly Montreal Expos were leading their league by six games, Tony Gwynn was enjoying a .400 batting average, and a number of ballplayers were having banner years. Just before the strike, the famed hitter Ken Griffey, Jr., was asked what he thought about the upcoming strike, especially since he and so many other ballplayers were doing so well. He replied: We picked a bad year to have a good year.
* injunction: (법원의) 명령
① We are disappointed with our personal records.
② For the strike, we are sacrificing a great season.
③ Rather than going on strike, we want to negotiate.
④ We consider the strike as an act of poor sportsmanship.
⑤ We admit there are different attitudes toward the strike.
















30.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 When the tea tray was being carried across the room to their table, Chloe’s eyes rounded and she almost gasped out loud. There were lots of tiny desserts and mini sandwiches and small biscuit­looking things. Where to start? Where to start? Her grandmother smiled and winked at ① her from across the table. Chloe winked back. ② She took a sip of the sweet tea and waited for her grandmother to make the first move. ③ She carefully mirrored her grandmother’s actions and started with a small, delicate sandwich. It was good. She ate it up and selected another. After a time, all the sandwiches were eaten up and Chloe boldly chose the biscuit­looking thing before her grandmother. “Aren’t the scones lovely, dear?” asked her grandmother, as ④ she spread cream and jam on hers. Scones, was that what they were called? Chloe had already started to eat hers without the cream and jam; in fact, it was mostly all in ⑤ her mouth already.

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. One of the most satisfactory aspects of using essential oils medicinally and cosmetically is that they enter and leave
the body with great efficiency, leaving no toxins behind. The most effective way to use essential oils is not orally, as one might think, but by external application or inhalation. The methods used include body oils, compresses, cosmetic lotions, baths, hair rinses, inhalation (by steam, direct from the bottle or from a tissue), perfumes, room sprays, and a whole range of room methods. Although under supervision the essential oils can be prescribed for oral ingestion, this is in fact their least effective mode of entry because it involves their passing through the digestive system, where they come into contact with digestive juices and other matter which affect their chemistry. This limitation also applies to any chemical medications. The  	 makes the essential oils of special benefit to patients whose digestive systems have, for whatever reason, been impaired.
[3점]
* inhalation: 흡입
① mood­enhancing ability
② flexibility of medicinal use
③ condensed nutritional value
④ stability at room temperature
⑤ complex composition of aromas







32. Political acts vary in terms of contribution. At one extreme,  within  limits, votes have equal weight. We  are
each allowed only one per election contest. But the principle of one person, one vote does not obtain for other kinds of participation. Individuals are free to write as many letters to public officials, work as many hours in campaigns, or join as many political organizations as their time and commitment allow.    When    it    comes    to    the    extent    to  which
                 , contributions to political campaigns and causes present a special case. Although there are no legal constraints on the number of phone calls a citizen can make to public officials or the number of marches a protester can attend, the fact that there are only twenty­four hours in a day imposes an implicit ceiling. In contrast, despite some campaign finance laws, there is no upper limit on the number of dollars that a person can contribute. [3점]
① the volume of activity can be multiplied
② social changes occur as a consequence
③ individual creativity is permissible
④ activities are backed up by votes
⑤ basic human rights are respected


	

6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3.Morality often expresses itself as a duty to perform an
action that advances the interests of another, to the harm of one’s own. However, moral actions usually do not occur in isolation, but rather as part of a generalized system of reciprocity (one that stands at the core of the social order in every human society). This system of reciprocity generates benefits for everyone involved (benefits such as freedom from worry of being robbed).  If observance of one’s own duties represents the price of admission into this generalized system of reciprocity, then it seems clear that respecting moral constraints also generates benefits. The primary difference between morality and prudence is simply that, in the latter case, the long­term benefits are secured through one’s own agency, whereas in the former case, they are mediated through the agency of another, namely, the person whose reciprocity is secured 	.
[3점]
* reciprocity: 호혜성, 상호의 이익 ** prudence: 사려, 분별
① despite the absence of shared morality
② through the pursuit of personal liberation
③ in terms of the financial benefits of agents
④ thanks to one’s compliance with the moral law
⑤ at the cost of collective interests of the society




34. The dictionary of course is not the last word on the definition of  bravery. Philosophers have   also  advanced
explanations of this elusive concept, as have social scientists of all stripes. One of the greatest conceits practiced by research psychologists and other academics is that    in    studying    people    we    often    forget    to
 	. I’ll give you an example. For decades my colleagues and I have  studied happiness and the good life. We know all about how money does and does not affect happiness and how happiness affects health, and we understand how happiness changes across the life cycle. But we have rarely stepped back and taken the time to ask people to define, for themselves, what they consider the good life to be! The same is true of courage. There are studies of how levels of courage differ from nation to nation and of how frequently women experience courage. Still, relatively few people have stopped to ask people what they think courage is. [3점]
* elusive: 파악하기 어려운 ** conceit: 자만, 독단
① identify their true motives in participating in the study
② gain trust from them before we ask personal questions
③ take into account their reluctance to reveal their opinions
④ categorize them by gender, nationality, and other social classes
⑤ ask them to personally weigh in on the topics being studied

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Because dogs dislike bitter tastes, various sprays and gels have been designed to keep them from chewing on furniture or other objects. These compounds often contain bitter substances, which not only have a sharp taste but also cause a burning sensation in the mouth. ① Coating items with bitter­tasting material will eventually keep most dogs from chewing on  them,  but  the  key  word  is  eventually  because the taste buds that sense bitterness are located on the rearmost third of the tongue. ② Therefore, a quick lick or fast gulp will not register the bitter taste. ③ Rather, only prolonged chewing will let the bitterness work its way back to where it can be tasted. ④ The arrangement of taste buds in dogs is somewhat similar to that in humans, with minor variations. ⑤ Then the dog must also learn to associate the bitter taste with the particular object for the avoidance to be learned.











[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) This is why an ice cube cannot flow. But as size  increases, gravity­induced stress becomes greater while internal strength remains the same. Thus at some minimum thickness flow will begin in ice, or in any material for that matter.
(B) It is too small for flow to occur. An ice cube thousands of times larger would sag under its own weight and flow away as a glacier. Flow in ice is caused by gravity, the same force that makes the water of a river flow downhill.
(C) When gravity­induced stress exceeds the force that holds the particles of water or ice together, the atoms and molecules slip past each other downslope. To exceed ice’s internal strength the downslope force produced by gravity must exceed some minimum value.
[3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


	

영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(A) At the restaurant, this is rude. In the game just mentioned, this is expected and acceptable behavior. Apparently, games give us a license to engage in conflicts, to prevent others from achieving their goals.
(B) However, if you were meeting the same people to play a board game, it would be completely acceptable for the same Joe to prevent you from winning the game. In the restaurant as well as in the game, Joe is aware of your intention, and Joe prevents you from doing what you are trying to do.
(C) Later, when you are leaving the restaurant, Joe dashes ahead of you and blocks the exit door from the outside. Joe is being rude ― when you understand what another person is trying to do, it is offensive, or at least confrontational, to prevent that person from doing it.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



 Rome left an enduring legacy in many areas and multiple ways. However, one of its clearest bequests was its influence over the development of law. ( ① ) There is a saying attributed to Goethe according to which Roman law was like a diving duck. ( ② ) It could be swimming on the surface or diving deep in the water, but whether you saw it or not, it was always there. ( ③ ) It is currently shared by most historians, who usually begin the story of the development of law in Europe with Roman law. ( ④ ) Of course, Romans were not the first people to have a normative system, and, like all other societies, they constantly borrowed from neighboring societies, most particularly from the Hellenistic world. ( ⑤ ) It is also clear that Roman law evolved dramatically over time, continuously adapting to new circumstances and challenges.
* bequest: 유산


40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?




 From the chemical point of view magma is an extremely complex system. ( ① ) The chemical composition of magma does not remain constant over time but varies in response to variations in the environment in which it is located. ( ② ) In contact with colder rocks, magma loses heat. ( ③ ) This change in temperature causes certain minerals to begin to crystallize, depriving the magma of those chemical components that are involved in the formation of the crystals while at the same time enriching the magma with other components that are not involved in the formation of the crystals. ( ④ ) Portions of rock can be incorporated into the magma, becoming molten or remaining as solid fragments within it. ( ⑤ ) In response to variations in chemical composition, temperature and most of all pressure, volatile substances contained in the magma like water or carbon dioxide can be released to form gas bubbles, producing great changes in the properties of the magma and in many cases leading to an eruption.
* volatile: 휘발성의










?
According to statistics, there have been (A) in the market demand for digital games, with gamers remaining in the market as they become (B) .

(A) (B)
① boosts	······	mature
② boosts	······	isolated
③ slumps	······	educated
④ fluctuations	······	connected
⑤ fluctuations	······	competitive


	

8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 










(C) 
 It was not long before that happened. We were invited to the minister’s house for dinner. As we prepared to go, Mom folded a dish towel and tucked it into (c) her handbag. “What’s that for, Mom?” I asked suspiciously. “It’s to tie under your chin,” she said. “Oh, Mom!” I moaned. “I’d rather be left at home!” “I’ve thought of that, too.” (d) She eyed me sternly. “But you have to learn how to conduct yourself in public someday.”











41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Aspire, and You Will Achieve
② Millionaires: Dreamers or Realists?
③ Humans: Too Adaptive to Feel Happier
④ Too Busy to Appreciate Life’s Goods?
⑤ Why Delaying Happiness Pays Off


42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
 One day at the table I reached for something without looking and dumped a cup of coffee into Dad’s plate. He looked at the messy results with distaste. “I’m not sure the pigs will even want this,” he commented. “Why don’t you look in the direction you’re moving, Susan?” scolded Mom, “When you’re eating, pay attention to what you’re doing. (a) I am afraid someday you’re going to embarrass yourself with someone besides your family.”


(D) 
 I was attempting to enter the conversation. In trying to explain the width of something, I flung my arms wide to measure the distance. As usual, I did not remember that I had something in my hand. A spoonful of sauce landed just under the nice lady’s chin. With horror I watched it dribble down into (e) her lap. The minister’s mother assured us that no permanent harm had been done. But I was in disgrace. The journey home was a difficult one. Dad remarked that he hoped I had learned my lesson.
43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 식탁에서 아버지의 접시에 커피를 쏟았다.
② 목사의 어머니로부터 옆에 앉으라는 권유를 받았다.
③ 턱받이를 하느니 그냥 집에 있겠다고 엄마에게 말했다.
④ 물건의 너비를 설명하려 팔을 양쪽으로 펼쳤다.
⑤ 대화 도중 음식을 흘려 목사의 어머니에게 꾸중을 들었다.


	
2022학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학생회장 선거 투표 결과를 공지하려고
② 음악 경연 대회 참가 신청을 권장하려고
③ 홈 쇼핑 가전제품 구매 방법을 설명하려고
④ 새로운 음악 프로그램 방송 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 노래 경연 우승자 선정을 위한 투표를 독려하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이들은 집안일을 함으로써 자존감을 높일 수 있다.
② 아이들의 나이에 맞는 균형 잡힌 식단 관리가 필요하다.
③ 집안일을 통해 아이들에게 경제관념을 심어 줄 수 있다.
④ 적절한 보상은 아이들의 독서 습관 형성에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 여행을 통해 아이들에게 가족의 중요성을 일깨워 줄 수 있다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 정원사－파티 플래너	② 꽃집 점원－식당 주인
③ 꽃꽂이 강사－수강생	④ 식물학 교수－행정실 직원
⑤ 잡지 편집장－음식 칼럼니스트

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 필터 주문하기	② 어항 물 갈기
③ 체리 주스 만들기	④ 세탁물 맡기기
⑤ 히터 온도 조절하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $50	② $60	③ $65	④ $75	⑤ $85







7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 Career Day 행사 장소를 변경하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 초청 강사의 요청이 있어서
② 다른 행사와 장소가 겹쳐서
③ 신청 학생이 예상보다 많아서
④ 보수 공사 소음이 시끄러워서
⑤ 세미나실 프로젝터가 고장 나서

8. 대화를 듣고, Digital Publishing Workshop에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적	② 대상	③ 날짜
④ 등록 방법	⑤ 준비물

9. 2021 Playground in the Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오 방송국이 주최한다.
② 다섯 개의 놀이 구역이 있다.
③ 최대 60명의 아이들이 참여할 수 있다.
④ 행사장에서 음식을 구입할 수 없다.
⑤ 비가 오면 일정이 조정된다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 블루투스 이어폰을 고르시오.
Bluetooth Earphones


①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. I only communicate face-to-face.
② Me, too. Don’t put me in the chat room.
③ Right. We don’t have biology class today.
④ No. We’ve already finished our group project.
⑤ Sure. I’ll open a chat room and invite everyone.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Thank you. I’m relieved to hear that.
② It’s terrible. I’ll go check if it’s ready.
③ That’s great. It’s good to be back home.
④ Okay. You’re free to read in the living room.
⑤ No way. Turn off the lights when you go to bed.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Too bad. I hope you’ll feel better soon.
② Of course. I’m sure you’ll win the race.
③ I see. I’ve never been a cycling champion.
④ All right. I’ll be just fine at the competition.
⑤ Terrific. I’m also looking forward to the camp.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① No problem. I can email you the details of our program.
② No worries. I’ll let you know what day is available.
③ That’s right. I need to get more students.
④ That’s true. It’s difficult to explain scientific principles.
⑤ Brilliant. I can recommend a good science fiction movie.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Megan이 Philip에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Megan:   	
① You can sign up for our membership and get a discount.
② I regret to say that I can’t find your membership number.
③ Unfortunately, the poster you’re looking for is not for sale.
④ Congratulations on the successful release of your new book.
⑤ I’m afraid the members’ discount doesn’t apply to this book.


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① what issues arise from abandoned pets
② how city growth affected wildlife diversity
③ why wild animals came to flourish in cities
④ ways to make cities environmentally friendly
⑤ problems between humans and animals in cities


17. 언급된 도시가 아닌 것은?
① Paris	② London	③ Delhi
④ Bangkok	⑤ New York City






18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Mr. Bernstein,
　My name is Thomas Cobb, the marketing director of Calbary Hospital. Our hospital is planning to hold a charity concert on September 18th in the Main Hall of our hospital. We expect it to be helpful in raising money to cover the medical costs of those in need. To make the concert more special, we want to invite you for the opening of the concert. Your reputation as a pianist is well known, and everyone will be very happy to see your performance. Beautiful piano melodies will help create an enjoyable experience for the audience. We look forward to your positive reply.
Sincerely, Thomas A. Cobb
① 의료비 지원이 필요한 이들을 위한 기부를 독려하려고
② 자선 음악회 연주자로 참여해 줄 것을 요청하려고
③ 피아노 독주회 관람 신청 방법을 문의하려고
④ 병원 개관 기념행사 참가 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 병원 진료 시간이 변경된 것을 알려 주려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 David의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? As he stepped onto the basketball court, David suddenly thought of the day he had gotten injured last season and froze.
He was not sure if he could play as well as before the injury. A serious wrist injury had caused him to miss the rest of the season. Remembering the surgery, he said to himself, “I thought my basketball career was completely over.” However, upon hearing his fans’ wild cheers, he felt his body coming alive and thought, “For sure, my fans, friends, and family are looking forward to watching me play today.” As soon as the game started, he was filled with energy. The first five shots he attempted went in the basket. “I’m back! I got this,” he shouted.
① disappointed → unhappy ② excited → indifferent
③ anxious → confident ④ impatient → calm
⑤ eager	→ ashamed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We live in a time when everyone seems to be looking for quick and sure solutions. Computer companies have even begun to advertise ways in which computers can replace parents. They are too late ― television has already done that. Seriously, however, in every branch of education, including moral education, we make a mistake when we suppose that a particular batch of content or a particular teaching method or a particular configuration of students and space will accomplish our ends. The answer is both harder and simpler. We, parents and teachers, have to live with our children, talk  to  them, listen to them, enjoy their company, and show them by what  we do and how we talk that it is possible to live appreciatively or, at least, nonviolently with most other people.
① 교육은 일상에서 아이들과의 상호 작용을 통해 이루어져야 한다.
② 도덕 교육을 강화하여 타인을 배려하는 공동체 의식을 높여야 한다.
③ 텔레비전의 부정적 영향을 줄이려는 사회적 노력이 있어야 한다.
④ 다양한 매체를 활용하여 학교와 가정 교육의 한계를 보완해야 한다.
⑤ 아이들의 온라인 예절 교육을 위해 적절한 콘텐츠를 개발해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 Flicking the collaboration light switch가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Flicking the collaboration light switch is something that leaders are uniquely positioned to do, because several  obstacles stand in the way of people voluntarily working  alone. For one thing, the fear of being left out of the loop can keep them glued to their enterprise social media. Individuals don’t want to be ― or appear to be ― isolated. For another, knowing what their teammates are doing provides a sense of comfort and security, because people can adjust their own behavior to be in harmony with the group. It’s risky to go off on their own to try something new that will probably not be successful right from the start. But even though it feels reassuring for individuals to be hyperconnected, it’s better for the organization if they periodically go off and think for themselves and generate diverse ― if not quite mature ― ideas. Thus, it becomes the leader’s job to create conditions that are good for the whole by enforcing intermittent interaction even when people wouldn’t choose it for themselves, without making it seem like a punishment.
* intermittent: 간헐적인
① breaking physical barriers and group norms that prohibit cooperation
② having people stop working together and start working individually
③ encouraging people to devote more time to online collaboration
④ shaping environments where higher productivity is required
⑤ requiring workers to focus their attention on group projects


22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Historically, the professions and society have engaged in a negotiating process intended to define the terms of their relationship. At the heart of this process is the tension between the professions’ pursuit of autonomy and the public’s demand for accountability. Society’s granting of power and privilege to the professions is premised on their willingness and ability to contribute to social well-being and to conduct their affairs in a manner consistent with broader social values. It has long been recognized that the expertise and privileged position of professionals confer authority and power that could readily be used to advance their own interests at the expense of those they serve. As Edmund Burke observed two centuries ago, “Men are qualified for civil liberty in exact proportion to their disposition to put moral chains upon their own appetites.” Autonomy has never been a one-way street and is never granted absolutely and irreversibly.
* autonomy: 자율성 ** privilege: 특권 *** premise: 전제로 말하다
① 전문직에 부여되는 자율성은 그에 상응하는 사회적 책임을 수반한다.
② 전문직의 권위는 해당 집단의 이익을 추구하는 데 이용되어 왔다.
③ 전문직의 사회적 책임을 규정할 수 있는 제도 정비가 필요하다.
④ 전문직이 되기 위한 자격 요건은 사회 경제적 요구에 따라 변화해 왔다.
⑤ 전문직의 업무 성과는 일정 수준의 자율성과 특권이 부여될 때 높아진다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　In Kant’s view, geometrical shapes are too perfect to induce an aesthetic experience. Insofar as they agree with the underlying concept or idea ― thus possessing the precision  that the ancient Greeks sought and celebrated ― geometrical shapes can be grasped, but they do not give rise to emotion, and, most importantly, they do not move the imagination to free and new (mental) lengths. Forms or phenomena, on the contrary, that possess a degree of immeasurability, or that do not appear constrained, stimulate the human imagination ― hence their ability to induce a sublime aesthetic experience. The pleasure associated with experiencing immeasurable objects ― indefinable or formless objects ― can be defined as enjoying one’s own emotional and mental  activity.  Namely, the pleasure consists of being challenged and struggling to understand and decode the phenomenon present to view. Furthermore, part of the pleasure comes from having one’s comfort zone (momentarily) violated.
* geometrical: 기하학의 ** aesthetic: 심미적인 *** sublime: 숭고한
① diversity of aesthetic experiences in different eras
② inherent beauty in geometrically perfect shapes
③ concepts of imperfection in modern aesthetics
④ natural inclination towards aesthetic precision
⑤ aesthetic pleasure from things unconstrained


24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The world has become a nation of laws and governance that has introduced a system of public administration and management to keep order. With this administrative management system, urban institutions of government have evolved to offer increasing levels of services to their citizenry, provided through a taxation process and/or fee for services (e.g., police and fire, street maintenance, utilities, waste management, etc.). Frequently this has displaced citizen involvement. Money for services is not a replacement for citizen responsibility and public participation. Responsibility of the citizen is slowly being supplanted by government being the substitute provider. Consequentially, there is a philosophical and social change in attitude and sense of responsibility of our urban-based society to become involved. The sense of community and associated responsibility of all citizens to be active participants is therefore diminishing. Governmental substitution for citizen duty and involvement can have serious implications. This impedes the nations of the world to be responsive to natural and man-made disasters as part of global preparedness.
* supplant: 대신하다 ** impede: 방해하다
① A Sound Citizen Responsibility in a Sound Government
② Always Better than Nothing: The Roles of Modern Government
③ Decreased Citizen Involvement: ACost of Governmental Services
④ Why Does Global Citizenship Matter in Contemporary Society?
⑤ How to Maximize Public Benefits of Urban-Based Society


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
U.S. States That Added the Most Solar Industry Workers Between 2015 and 2020


Rank
State　Number of Workers Added   Growth Percentage (%)1Florida4,659712Utah4,2461583Texas3,058444Virginia2,3521205Minnesota2,0031016New York1,964247Pennsylvania1,81072　The table above shows seven U.S. states ranked by the number of workers added in the solar industry between 2015 and 2020, and provides information on the corresponding growth percentage in each state. ① During this period, Florida, which ranked first with regard to the number of workers added, exhibited 71% growth. ② The number of workers added in Utah was more than twice the number of workers added in Minnesota. ③ Regarding Texas and Virginia, each state showed less than 50% growth. ④ New York added more than 1,900 workers, displaying 24% growth. ⑤ Among these seven states, Pennsylvania added the lowest number of workers during this period.









26. Henry Moore에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Henry Moore (1898?1986), one of the most significant British artists of the 20th century, was the seventh child of a coal miner. Henry Moore showed a talent for art from early on in school. After World War I, during which he volunteered for army service, Moore began to study sculpture at the Leeds School of Art. Then, he entered the Royal College of Art in London and earned his degree there. His sculptures, known around the world, present the forms of the body in a unique way. One of his artistic themes was mother-and-child as shown in Madonna and Child at St. Matthew’s Church in Northampton. He achieved financial success from his hard work and established the Henry Moore Foundation to support
education and promotion of the arts.
① 석탄 광부의 일곱 번째 자녀였다.
② 학창 시절에 일찍이 예술에 재능을 보였다.
③ 런던에 있는 Royal College of Art에서 학위를 취득했다.
④ 그의 조각은 신체 형태를 독특한 방식으로 나타낸다.
⑤ 경제적으로 성공을 거두지 못했다.
27. 
2021 Whir Car Drawing Contest for Kids에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

2021 Whir Car Drawing Contest for Kids Theme: Family
　Does your child love cars? Take this  opportunity  for your child to think about what they love and draw it. They will definitely enjoy and learn from this contest!
Details
?Ten  entries  are  chosen,  and  each  is awarded a $50 gift certificate.
?Drawing skills are not considered in judging.
Submission
?Take a photo of your child’s drawing.
?Visit our website (www.whircar4kids.com) and upload the photo by October 3.
Note
?The drawing should contain your family and a car.
?Participants must be 3 to 7 years old. Please visit our website to learn more.
① 출품작 중 10개를 선정해서 시상한다.
② 그림 기술이 심사에서 고려된다.
③ 그림을 찍은 사진을 웹사이트에 업로드해야 한다.
④ 그림은 가족과 차를 포함해야 한다.
⑤ 참가자의 나이는 3세에서 7세까지로 제한된다.

28. Mary High School Foreign Language Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Mary High School Foreign Language Program
　Would you like to learn  about another culture?  Learning a new language is the best way to do it. Please come and enjoy our new foreign language classes.
Languages: Arabic, French, Spanish (A student can choose only one.)
Dates and Times: September 13, 2021 ? October 29, 2021 Monday to Friday, 4:00 p.m. ? 6:00 p.m.
Registration: Available from September 1 to September  5  on our website (www.maryhighs.edu)
Tuition Fee: $50 (Full payment is required when registering.)
Refund Policy: If you cancel on or before September 5, your payment will be refunded.
　For more information about the classes, feel free to contact us at (215) 8393-6047 or email us at info@maryhighs.edu.

① 학생은 두 개의 언어를 선택할 수 있다.
② 수업은 주말에 진행된다.
③ 수업료는 등록 시 전액 납부하지 않아도 된다.
④ 9월 5일까지 취소하면 환불받을 수 있다.
⑤ 수업 관련 문의는 이메일을 통해서만 할 수 있다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Accepting whatever others are communicating only pays off if their interests correspond to ours ― think cells in a body, bees in a beehive. As far as communication between humans   is concerned, such commonality of interests ① is rarely achieved; even a pregnant mother has reasons to mistrust the chemical signals sent by her fetus. Fortunately, there are ways of making communication work even in the most adversarial  of relationships. A prey can convince a predator not to chase
② it. But for such communication to occur, there must be strong guarantees ③ which those who receive the signal will be better off believing it. The messages have to be kept, on the whole, ④ honest. In the case of humans, honesty is maintained by a set of cognitive mechanisms that evaluate ⑤ communicated information. These mechanisms allow us to accept most beneficial messages ― to be open ― while rejecting most harmful messages ― to be vigilant.
* fetus: 태아 ** adversarial: 반대자의 *** vigilant: 경계하는









30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　In economic systems what takes place in one sector has impacts on another; demand for a good or service in one sector is derived from another. For instance, a consumer buying a good in a store will likely trigger the replacement of this product, which will generate ① demands for activities such as manufacturing, resource extraction and, of course, transport. What is different about transport is that it cannot exist alone and a movement cannot be ② stored. An unsold product can remain on the shelf of a store until bought (often with discount incentives), but an unsold seat on a flight or unused cargo capacity in the same flight remains unsold and cannot be brought back as additional capacity ③ later. In this case an opportunity has been ④ seized, since the amount of transport being offered has exceeded the demand for it. The derived demand of transportation is often very difficult to reconcile with an equivalent supply, and actually transport companies would prefer to have some additional capacity to accommodate ⑤ unforeseen demand (often at much higher prices).
* reconcile: 조화시키다

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When examining the archaeological record of human culture, one has to consider that it is vastly 	. Many aspects of human culture have what archaeologists describe as low archaeological visibility, meaning they are difficult to identify archaeologically. Archaeologists tend to focus on tangible (or material) aspects of culture: things that can be handled and photographed, such as tools, food, and structures. Reconstructing intangible aspects of culture is more difficult, requiring that one draw more inferences from the tangible. It is relatively easy, for example, for archaeologists to identify and draw inferences about technology and diet from stone  tools  and food remains. Using the same kinds of physical remains to draw inferences about social systems and what people were thinking about is more difficult. Archaeologists do it, but there are necessarily more inferences involved in getting from physical remains recognized as trash to making interpretations about belief systems.
* archaeological: 고고학의
① outdated	② factual
③ incomplete	④ organized
⑤ detailed








32. Even as mundane a behavior as watching TV may be a way for some people to 	. To test this idea, Sophia Moskalenko and Steven Heine gave participants false feedback about their test performance, and then seated each one in front of a TV set to watch a video as the next part of the study. When the video came on, showing nature scenes with a musical soundtrack, the experimenter exclaimed that this was the wrong video and went supposedly to get the correct one, leaving the participant alone as  the video played. The participants who had received failure feedback watched the video much longer than those who thought they had succeeded. The researchers concluded that distraction through television viewing can effectively relieve the discomfort associated with painful failures or mismatches between the self and self-guides. In contrast, successful participants had little wish to be distracted from their self-related thoughts!
* mundane: 보통의
① ignore uncomfortable comments from their close peers
② escape painful self-awareness through distraction
③ receive constructive feedback from the media
④ refocus their divided attention to a given task
⑤ engage themselves in intense self-reflection


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. It is important to recognise the interdependence between individual, culturally formed actions and the state of cultural integration. People work within the forms provided by the cultural patterns that they have internalised, however contradictory these may be. Ideas are worked out as logical implications or consequences of other accepted ideas, and it is in this way that cultural innovations and discoveries are possible. New ideas are discovered through logical reasoning, but such discoveries are inherent in and integral to the conceptual system and are made possible only because of the acceptance of its premises. For example, the discoveries of new prime numbers are ‘real’ consequences of the particular number system employed. Thus, cultural ideas show ‘advances’ and ‘developments’ because  they 	. The cumulative work of many individuals produces a corpus of knowledge within which certain ‘discoveries’ become possible or more likely. Such discoveries are ‘ripe’ and could not have occurred earlier and are also likely to be made simultaneously by numbers of individuals. [3점]
* corpus: 집적(集積) ** simultaneously: 동시에
① are outgrowths of previous ideas
② stem from abstract reasoning ability
③ form the basis of cultural universalism
④ emerge between people of the same age
⑤ promote individuals’ innovative thinking





34. Enabling animals to  	                                                                is an almost universal function of learning. Most animals innately avoid objects they have not previously encountered. Unfamiliar objects may be dangerous; treating them with caution has survival value. If persisted in, however, such careful behavior could interfere with feeding and other necessary activities to the extent that the benefit of caution would be lost. A turtle that withdraws into its shell at every puff of wind or whenever a cloud casts a shadow would never win races, not even with a lazy rabbit. To overcome this problem, almost all animals habituate to safe stimuli that occur frequently. Confronted by a strange object, an inexperienced animal may freeze or attempt to hide, but if nothing unpleasant happens, sooner or later it will continue its activity. The possibility also exists that an unfamiliar object may be useful, so if it poses no immediate threat, a closer inspection may be worthwhile. [3점]
* innately: 선천적으로
① weigh the benefits of treating familiar things with care
② plan escape routes after predicting possible attacks
③ overcome repeated feeding failures for survival
④ operate in the presence of harmless stimuli
⑤ monitor the surrounding area regularly
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　A variety of theoretical perspectives provide insight into immigration. Economics, which assumes that actors engage in utility maximization, represents one framework. ① From this perspective, it is assumed that individuals are rational actors, i.e., that they make migration decisions based on their assessment of the costs as well as benefits of remaining in a given area versus the costs and benefits of leaving. ② Benefits may include but are not limited to short-term and long-term monetary gains, safety, and greater freedom of cultural expression. ③ People with greater financial benefits tend to use their money to show off their social status by purchasing luxurious items. ④ Individual costs include but are not limited to the expense of travel, uncertainty of living in a foreign land, difficulty of adapting to a different language, uncertainty about a different culture, and the great concern about living in a new land. ⑤ Psychic costs associated with separation from family, friends, and the fear of the unknown also should be taken into account in cost-benefit assessments.
* psychic: 심적인

[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) They’d rather put money and time into known, profitable, high-volume products that serve populous customer segments than into risky, less-profitable, low-volume products that may serve current noncustomers. Given that choice, these companies may choose to leave the green segment of the market to small niche competitors.
(B) Even if the green product succeeds, it may cannibalize the company’s higher-profit mainstream offerings. Given such downsides, companies serving mainstream consumers with successful mainstream products face what seems like an obvious investment decision.
(C) Furthermore, the restrictive ingredient lists and design criteria that are typical of such products  may  make green products inferior to mainstream products on core performance dimensions (e.g., less effective cleansers). In turn, the higher costs and lower performance of some products attract only a small portion of the customer base, leading to lower economies of scale in procurement, manufacturing, and distribution.
* segment: 조각 ** cannibalize: 잡아먹다 *** procurement: 조달
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.




(A) They might be motorized and can track the user around  the room, giving the impression of being aware of the people in the environment. Although personal robotic assistants provide services similar to those of smart-home assistants, their social presence offers an opportunity that is unique to social robots.
(B) Personal robotic assistants are devices that have no physical manipulation or locomotion capabilities. Instead, they have a distinct social presence and have visual features suggestive of their ability to interact socially, such as eyes, ears, or a mouth.
(C) For instance, in addition to playing music, a social personal assistant robot would express its engagement with the music so that users would feel like they are listening to the music together with the robot. These robots can be used as surveillance devices, act as communicative intermediates, engage in richer games, tell stories, or be used to provide encouragement or incentives. [3점]
* locomotion: 이동 ** surveillance: 감시
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
The growing complexity of the social dynamics determining food choices makes the job of marketers and advertisers increasingly more difficult. ( ① ) In the past, mass production allowed for accessibility and affordability of products, as well as their wide distribution, and was accepted as a sign of progress. ( ② ) Nowadays it  is  increasingly  replaced  by the fragmentation of consumers among smaller and smaller segments that are supposed to  reflect personal preferences. ( ③ ) Everybody feels different and special and expects products serving his or her inclinations. ( ④ ) In reality, these supposedly individual preferences end up overlapping with emerging, temporary, always changing, almost tribal formations solidifying around cultural sensibilities, social identifications, political sensibilities, and dietary and health concerns. ( ⑤ ) These consumer communities go beyond national boundaries, feeding on global and widely shared repositories of ideas, images, and practices. [3점]
* fragmentation: 파편화 ** repository: 저장소

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The earliest humans had access to only a very limited number of materials, those that occur naturally: stone, wood, clay, skins, and so on. ( ① ) With time, they discovered techniques for producing materials that had properties superior to those of the natural ones; these new materials included pottery and various metals. ( ② ) Furthermore, it was discovered that the properties of a material could be altered by heat treatments and by the addition of other substances. ( ③ ) At this point, materials utilization was totally a selection process that involved deciding from a given, rather limited set of materials, the one best suited for an application based on its characteristics. ( ④ ) This knowledge, acquired over approximately the past 100 years, has empowered them to fashion, to a large degree, the characteristics of materials. ( ⑤ ) Thus, tens of thousands of different materials have evolved with rather specialized characteristics that meet the needs of our modern and complex society, including metals, plastics, glasses, and fibers.












(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① competent …… comprehensive	② dominant …… biased
③ imperfect …… informed	④ impressive …… legal
⑤ inefficient …… timely



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)













(C)
(D) 













41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Perfect Planning and Faulty Results: A Sad Reality in Research
② Don’t Let Irrelevant Factors Influence the Results!
③ Protect Human Subjects Involved in Experimental Research!
④ What Nutrients Could Better Defend Against Colds?
⑤ In-depth Analysis of Nutrition: A Key Player for Human Health


42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Sally는 사진 수업 후 집으로 돌아왔다.
② Brown 교수님은 음식에서 시각적인 면이 중요하다고 말했다.
③ Sally는 냉장고에서 채소가 든 그릇을 꺼냈다.
④ Sally는 색깔 있는 파스타를 만드는 것이 어렵다고 말했다.
⑤ Katie는 요리 시험 준비에 어려움을 겪고 있었다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2022학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 조련사 자격증 취득 방법을 설명하려고
② 동물 병원 확장 이전을 공지하려고
③ 새로 출시된 개 사료를 소개하려고
④ 반려동물 입양 절차를 안내하려고
⑤ 개 훈련 센터를 홍보하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 여행 전에 합리적으로 예산을 계획해야 한다.
② 여행 가서 할 것을 너무 많이 계획하면 안 된다.
③ 인생에서 자신의 원칙을 고수하는 것이 중요하다.
④ 여행은 사고의 폭을 확장시켜 사람을 성장하게 한다.
⑤ 보호자 없이 학생끼리 여행하는 것은 안전하지 않다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오 쇼 진행자 － 제빵사 ② 리포터 － 과수원 주인
③ 광고주 － 요리사	④ 방송 작가 － 경제학자
⑤ 유통업자 － 농부

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 리본 가져오기	② 선글라스 주문하기
③ 사진사 섭외하기	④ 설문 조사 실시하기
⑤ 졸업 연설문 작성하기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36	② $45	③ $50	④ $54	⑤ $60




7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 탁구 연습을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 학교 도서관에 자원봉사를 하러 가야 해서
② 과학 퀴즈를 위한 공부를 해야 해서
③ 연극부 모임에 참가해야 해서
④ 역사 숙제를 제출해야 해서
⑤ 어깨에 통증이 있어서

8. 대화를 듣고, Little Readers’ Class에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 시간	③ 대상 연령
④ 모집 인원	⑤ 등록 방법

9. 2021  Family  Science  Festival에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 12월 7일부터 일주일 동안 진행된다.
② 8개의 프로그램이 제공될 것이다.
③ 어린이 과학 잡지를 판매할 것이다.
④ 11세 미만의 어린이들은 성인을 동반해야 한다.
⑤ 참가를 위해 미리 등록해야 한다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 스터디 룸을 고르시오.
Study Rooms


①
②
③
④
⑤

11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Just give me about ten minutes.
② It took an hour for us to get back home.
③ I think you need to focus on your work.
④ It was nice of you to invite my co-workers.
⑤ Call me when you finish sending the email.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Excellent. I like the camera you bought for me.
② Good. I’ll stop by and get it on my way home.
③ Never mind. I’ll drop off the camera tomorrow.
④ I see. Thanks for taking those pictures of me.
⑤ No way. That’s too expensive for the repair.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① No worries. Stress is not always as bad as you think.
② Don’t forget to bring a charger whenever you go out.
③ Great. That’ll be a good way to take time for yourself.
④ I think working out too much will burn all your energy.
⑤ Fantastic. Let’s enjoy ourselves at the exhibition with the kids.



14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Please check it again. The hotel can’t be fully booked.
② Too bad. I should’ve checked out as early as possible.
③ Sure. I’m very satisfied with your cleaning service.
④ I’m sorry. You can’t switch your room with mine.
⑤ Perfect. That’s high enough to avoid the smell.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jason이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jason:   	
① Good luck. I hope you finish your work in time.
② Okay. Let’s meet to discuss the changes to the sculpture.
③ That’s terrible. I’m sorry that the reopening was postponed.
④ Hurry up. You have to send the final design immediately.
⑤ Don’t worry. I can get the job done before the deadline.



[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects of incorporating painting into math education
② mathematical analysis of the art industry’s growth
③ application of mathematics in different types of art
④ historical review of important concepts in the arts
⑤ challenges of harmonizing mathematics and art



17. 언급된 예술 분야가 아닌 것은?
① music	② painting	③ photography
④ dance	⑤ cinema
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Ms. Green,
　My name is Donna Williams, a science teacher at Rogan High School. I am planning a special workshop for our science teachers. We are interested in learning how to teach online science classes. I have been impressed with your ideas about using internet platforms for science classes. Since you are an expert in online education, I would like to ask you to deliver a special lecture at the workshop scheduled for next month. I am sure the lecture will help our teachers manage successful online science classes, and I hope we can learn from your insights. I am looking forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely, Donna Williams
① 과학 교육 정책 협의회 참여를 독려하려고
② 과학 교사 워크숍의 특강을 부탁하려고
③ 과학 교사 채용 계획을 공지하려고
④ 과학 교육 프로그램 개발을 요청하려고
⑤ 과학 교육 워크숍 일정의 변경을 안내하려고

19. 다음 글에 나타난 Evelyn의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　It was Evelyn’s first time to explore the Badlands of  Alberta, famous across Canada for its numerous dinosaur fossils. As a young amateur bone-hunter, she was overflowing with anticipation. She had not travelled this far for the bones  of common dinosaur species. Her life-long dream to find rare fossils of dinosaurs was about to come true. She began eagerly searching for them. After many hours of wandering throughout the deserted lands, however, she was unsuccessful. Now, the sun was beginning to set, and her goal was still far beyond her reach. Looking at the slowly darkening ground before her, she sighed to herself, “I can’t believe I came all this way for nothing. What a waste of time!”
① confused → scared	② discouraged → confident
③ relaxed	→ annoyed	④ indifferent	→ depressed
⑤ hopeful	→ disappointed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One of the most common mistakes made by organizations when they first consider experimenting with social media is that they focus too much on social media tools and platforms and not enough on their business objectives. The reality of success in the social web for businesses is that creating a social media program begins not with insight into the latest social media tools and channels but with a thorough understanding of the organization’s own goals and objectives. A social media program is not merely the fulfillment of a vague need to manage a “presence” on popular social networks because “everyone else is doing it.” “Being in social media” serves no purpose    in and of itself. In order to serve any purpose at all, a social media presence must either solve a problem for the organization and its customers or result in an improvement of some sort (preferably a measurable one). In all things, purpose drives success. The world of social media is no different.
① 기업 이미지에 부합하는 소셜 미디어를 직접 개발하여 운영해야 한다.
② 기업은 사회적 가치와 요구를 반영하여 사업 목표를 수립해야 한다.
③ 기업은 소셜 미디어를 활용할 때 사업 목표를 토대로 해야 한다.
④ 소셜 미디어로 제품을 홍보할 때는 구체적인 정보를 제공해야 한다.
⑤ 소비자의 의견을 수렴하기 위해 소셜 미디어를 적극 활용해야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 whether to make ready for the morning commute  or not이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Scientists have no special purchase on moral or ethical decisions; a climate scientist is no more qualified to comment on health care reform than a physicist is to judge the causes of bee colony collapse. The very features that create expertise in a specialized domain lead to ignorance in many others. In some cases lay people ― farmers, fishermen, patients, native peoples ― may have relevant experiences that scientists can learn from. Indeed, in recent years, scientists have begun to recognize this: the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment includes observations gathered from local native groups. So our trust needs to be limited, and focused. It needs to be very particular. Blind trust will get us into at least as much trouble as no trust at all. But without some degree of trust in our designated experts ― the men and women who have devoted their lives to sorting out tough questions about the natural world we live in ― we are paralyzed, in effect not knowing whether to make ready for   the morning commute or not.
* lay: 전문가가 아닌 ** paralyze: 마비시키다 *** commute: 통근
① questionable facts that have been popularized by non-experts
② readily applicable information offered by specialized experts
③ common knowledge that hardly influences crucial decisions
④ practical information produced by both specialists and lay people
⑤ biased knowledge that is widespread in the local community


22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Environmental hazards include biological, physical, and chemical ones, along with the human behaviors that promote  or allow exposure. Some environmental contaminants are difficult to avoid (the breathing of polluted air, the drinking of chemically contaminated public drinking water, noise in open public spaces); in these circumstances, exposure is largely involuntary. Reduction or elimination of these factors may require societal action, such as public awareness and public health measures. In many countries, the fact that some environmental hazards are difficult to avoid at the individual level is felt to be more morally egregious than those hazards that can be avoided. Having no choice but to drink water contaminated with very high levels of arsenic, or being forced to passively breathe in tobacco smoke in restaurants, outrages people more than the personal choice of whether an individual smokes tobacco. These factors are important when one considers how change (risk reduction) happens.
* contaminate: 오염시키다 ** egregious: 매우 나쁜
① 개인이 피하기 어려운 유해 환경 요인에대해서는 사회적 대응이 필요하다.
② 환경오염으로 인한 피해자들에게 적절한 보상을 하는 것이 바람직하다.
③ 다수의 건강을 해치는 행위에 대해 도덕적 비난 이상의 조치가 요구된다.
④ 환경오염 문제를 해결하기 위해서는 사후 대응보다 예방이 중요하다.
⑤ 대기오염 문제는 인접 국가들과의 긴밀한 협력을 통해 해결할 수 있다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Scientists use paradigms rather than believing them. The use of a paradigm in research typically addresses related problems by employing shared concepts, symbolic expressions, experimental and mathematical tools and procedures, and even some of the same theoretical statements. Scientists need only understand how to use these various elements in ways that others would accept. These elements of shared practice thus need not presuppose any comparable unity in scientists’ beliefs about what they are doing when they use them. Indeed, one role of a paradigm is to enable scientists to work successfully without having to provide a detailed account of what they are doing or what they believe about it. Thomas Kuhn noted that scientists “can agree in their identification of a paradigm without agreeing on, or even attempting to produce, a full interpretation or rationalization of it. Lack of a standard interpretation or of an agreed reduction to rules will not prevent a paradigm from guiding research.”
① difficulty in drawing novel theories from existing paradigms
② significant influence of personal beliefs in scientific fields
③ key factors that promote the rise of innovative paradigms
④ roles of a paradigm in grouping like-minded researchers
⑤ functional aspects of a paradigm in scientific research






24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Mending and restoring objects often require even more creativity than original production. The preindustrial blacksmith made things to order for people in his immediate community; customizing the product, modifying or transforming it according to the user, was routine. Customers would bring things back if something went wrong; repair was thus an extension of fabrication. With industrialization and eventually with mass production, making things became the province of machine tenders with limited knowledge. But repair continued to require a larger grasp of design and materials, an understanding of the whole and a comprehension of the designer’s intentions. “Manufacturers all work by machinery or by vast subdivision of labour and not, so to speak, by hand,” an 1896 Manual of Mending and Repairing explained. “But all repairing must be done by hand. We  can make every detail of a watch or of a  gun by machinery, but the machine cannot mend it when broken, much less a clock or a pistol!”
① Still Left to the Modern Blacksmith: The Art of Repair
② A Historical Survey of How Repairing Skills Evolved
③ How to Be a Creative Repairperson: Tips and Ideas
④ A Process of Repair: Create, Modify, Transform!
⑤ Can Industrialization Mend Our Broken Past?


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Cornhill No Paper Cup Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
















　The above graphs show the percentage share of the global middle class by region in 2015 and its projected share  in  2025. ① It is projected that the share of the global middle class in Asia Pacific will increase from 46 percent in 2015 to 60 percent in 2025. ② The projected share of Asia Pacific in 2025, the largest among the six regions, is more than three times that of Europe in the same year. ③ The shares  of  Europe and North America are both projected to  decrease, from 24 percent in 2015 to 16 percent in 2025 for Europe, and
from 11 percent in 2015 to 8 percent in 2025 for North America. ④ Central and South America is not expected to change from 2015 to 2025 in its share of the global middle class. ⑤ In 2025, the share of the Middle East and North Africa will be larger than that of sub-Saharan Africa, as it was in 2015.


26. Donato Bramante에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Donato Bramante, born in Fermignano, Italy, began to paint early in his life. His father encouraged him to study painting. Later, he worked as an assistant of Piero della Francesca in Urbino. Around 1480, he built several churches in a new style in Milan. He had a close relationship with Leonardo da Vinci, and they worked together in that city. Architecture became his main interest, but he did not give up painting. Bramante  moved to Rome in 1499 and participated in Pope Julius II’s plan for the renewal of Rome. He planned the new Basilica of St. Peter in Rome ― one of the most ambitious building projects in the history of humankind. Bramante died on April 11, 1514 and was buried in Rome. His buildings influenced other architects for centuries.
① Piero della Francesca의 조수로 일했다.
② Milan에서 새로운 양식의 교회들을 건축했다.
③ 건축에 주된 관심을 갖게 되면서 그림 그리기를 포기했다.
④ Pope Julius II의 Rome  재개발 계획에 참여했다.
⑤ 그의 건축물들은 다른 건축가들에게 영향을 끼쳤다.

Cornhill No Paper Cup Challenge
　Cornhill High School invites you to join the “No Paper Cup Challenge.” This encourages you to reduce your use of paper cups. Let’s save the earth together!
How to Participate
1) After being chosen, record a video showing you are using a tumbler.
2) Choose the next participant by saying his or her name in the video.
3) Upload the video to our school website within 24 hours.
※ The student council president will start the challenge on December 1st, 2021.
Additional Information
?The challenge will last for two weeks.
?All participants will receive T-shirts.
　If you have questions about the challenge, contact us at cornhillsc@chs.edu.

① 참가자는 텀블러를 사용하는 자신의 동영상을 찍는다.
② 참가자가 동영상을 업로드할 곳은 학교 웹사이트이다.
③ 학생회장이 시작할 것이다.
④ 두 달 동안 진행될 예정이다.
⑤ 참가자 전원이 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.


28. Goldbeach SeaWorld Sleepovers에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Goldbeach SeaWorld Sleepovers
　Do your children love marine animals? A sleepover at Goldbeach SeaWorld will surely be an exciting overnight experience for them. Join us for a magical underwater sleepover.
Participants
Children ages 8 to 12
Children must be accompanied by a guardian.
When: Saturdays 5 p.m. to Sundays 10 a.m. in May, 2022
Activities: guided tour, underwater show, and photo session with a mermaid
Participation Fee
$50 per person (dinner and breakfast included)
Note
Sleeping bags and other personal items will not be provided.
All activities take place indoors.
Taking photos is not allowed from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
　For more information, you can visit our website at www.goldbeachseaworld.com.

① 7세 이하의 어린이가 참가할 수 있다.
② 평일에 진행된다.
③ 참가비에 아침 식사가 포함된다.
④ 모든 활동은 야외에서 진행된다.
⑤ 사진 촬영은 언제든지 할 수 있다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Like whole individuals, cells have a life span. During their life cycle (cell cycle), cell size, shape, and metabolic activities can change dramatically. A cell is “born” as a twin when its mother cell divides, ① producing two daughter cells. Each daughter cell is smaller than the mother cell, and except for unusual cases, each grows until it becomes as large as the mother cell ② was. During this time, the cell absorbs water, sugars, amino acids, and other nutrients and assembles them into new, living protoplasm. After the cell has grown to the proper size, its metabolism shifts as it either prepares to divide or matures and
③ differentiates into a specialized cell. Both growth and development require a complex and dynamic set of interactions involving all cell parts. ④ What cell metabolism and structure should be complex would not be surprising, but actually, they are rather simple and logical. Even the most complex cell has only a small number of parts, each ⑤ responsible for a distinct, well-defined aspect of cell life.
* metabolic: 물질대사의 ** protoplasm: 원형질







30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　It has been suggested that “organic” methods, defined as those in which only natural products can be used as inputs, would be less damaging to the biosphere. Large-scale adoption of “organic” farming methods, however, would ① reduce yields and increase production costs for many major crops. Inorganic nitrogen supplies are ② essential for maintaining moderate to high levels of productivity for many of the non-leguminous crop species, because organic supplies of nitrogenous materials often are either limited or more expensive than inorganic nitrogen fertilizers. In addition, there are ③ benefits to the extensive use of either manure or legumes as “green manure” crops. In many cases, weed control can be very difficult or require much hand labor if chemicals cannot be used, and ④ fewer people are willing to do this work as societies become wealthier. Some methods used in “organic” farming, however, such as the sensible use of crop rotations  and specific combinations of cropping and livestock enterprises, can make important ⑤ contributions to the sustainability of rural ecosystems.
* nitrogen fertilizer: 질소 비료 ** manure: 거름
*** legume: 콩과(科) 식물

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Humour involves not just practical disengagement but cognitive disengagement. As long as something is funny, we are for the moment not concerned with whether it is real or fictional, true or false. This is why we give considerable leeway to people telling funny stories. If they are getting extra laughs by exaggerating the silliness of a situation or even by making up a few details, we are happy to grant them comic licence, a kind of poetic licence. Indeed, someone listening to  a funny story who tries to correct the teller ― ‘No, he didn’t spill the spaghetti on the keyboard and the monitor, just on the keyboard’ ― will probably be told by the other listeners  to stop interrupting. The creator of humour is putting ideas into people’s heads for the pleasure those ideas will bring, not to provide 	information.
* cognitive: 인식의 ** leeway: 여지
① accurate	② detailed
③ useful	④ additional
⑤ alternative










32. News, especially in its televised form, is constituted not only by its choice of topics and stories but by its
 	. Presentational styles have been subject to a tension between an informational-educational purpose and the need to engage us entertainingly. While current affairs programmes are often ‘serious’ in tone sticking to the ‘rules’ of balance, more  popular programmes adopt a friendly, lighter, idiom in which we are invited to consider the impact of particular news items from the perspective of the ‘average person in the street’. Indeed, contemporary news construction has come to rely on an increased use of faster editing tempos and ‘flashier’ presentational styles including the use of logos, sound-bites, rapid visual cuts and the ‘star quality’ of news readers. Popular formats can be said to enhance understanding by engaging an audience unwilling to endure the longer verbal orientation of older news formats. However, they arguably work to reduce understanding by failing to provide the structural contexts for news events.
① coordination with traditional display techniques
② prompt and full coverage of the latest issues
③ educational media contents favoured by producers
④ commitment to long-lasting news standards
⑤ verbal and visual idioms or modes of address


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Elinor Ostrom found that there are several factors critical to bringing about stable institutional solutions to the problem of the commons. She pointed out, for instance, that the actors affected by the rules for the use and care of resources must have the right to 	. For that reason, the people who monitor and control the behavior of users should also be users and/or have been given  a mandate by all users. This is a significant insight, as it shows that prospects are poor for a centrally directed solution to the problem of the commons coming from a state power in comparison with a local solution for which users assume personal responsibility. Ostrom also emphasizes the importance of democratic decision processes and that all users must be given access to local forums for solving problems and conflicts among themselves. Political institutions at central, regional, and local levels must allow users to devise their own regulations and independently ensure observance. [3점]
* commons: 공유지 ** mandate: 위임
① participate in decisions to change the rules
② claim individual ownership of the resources
③ use those resources to maximize their profits
④ demand free access to the communal resources
⑤ request proper distribution based on their merits



34. Precision and determinacy are a necessary requirement for all meaningful scientific debate, and progress in the sciences  is, to a large extent, the ongoing process of achieving ever greater precision. But historical representation puts a premium on a proliferation of representations, hence not on the refinement of one representation but on the  production  of an ever more varied set of representations. Historical insight   is not a matter of a continuous “narrowing down” of previous options, not of an approximation of the truth, but, on the contrary, is an “explosion” of possible points of view. It therefore aims at the unmasking of previous illusions of determinacy and precision by the production of new and alternative representations, rather than  at  achieving  truth by a careful analysis of what was right and wrong in those previous representations. And from this perspective, the development of historical insight may indeed be regarded by the outsider as a process of creating ever more confusion, a continuous questioning of 	, rather than, as in the sciences, an ever greater approximation   to the truth. [3점]
* proliferation: 증식
① criteria for evaluating historical representations
② certainty and precision seemingly achieved already
③ possibilities of alternative interpretations of an event
④ coexistence of multiple viewpoints in historical writing
⑤ correctness and reliability of historical evidence collected
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Since their introduction, information systems have substantially changed the way business is conducted. ① This is particularly true for business in the shape and form of cooperation between firms that involves an integration of value chains across multiple units. ② The resulting networks do not only cover the business units of a single firm but typically also include multiple units from different firms. ③ As a consequence, firms do not only need to consider their internal organization  in order to ensure sustainable business performance; they also need to take into account the entire ecosystem of units surrounding them. ④ Many major companies are fundamentally changing their business models by focusing on profitable units and cutting off less profitable ones. ⑤ In order to allow these different units to cooperate successfully, the existence of a common platform is crucial.








[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) Many examples of such “green taxes” exist. Facing landfill costs, labor expenses, and related costs in the provision of garbage disposal, for example, some cities have required households to dispose of all waste in special trash bags, purchased by consumers themselves, and often costing a dollar or more each.
(B) Taxing certain goods or services, and so increasing prices, should result in either decreased use of these resources or creative innovation of new sources or options. The money raised through the tax can be used directly by the government either to supply services or to search for alternatives.
(C) The results have been greatly increased recycling and more careful attention by consumers to packaging and waste.  By internalizing the costs of trash to consumers, there has been an observed decrease in the flow of garbage from households.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) The author has selected the content according to his own worldview and his own conception of relevance, in an attempt to be neutral and objective or convey a subjective view on the world. Whatever the motives, the author’s subjective conception of the world stands between the reader and the original, untouched world on which the story is based.
(B) Because of the inner qualities with which the individual is endowed through heritage and environment, the mind functions as a filter; every outside impression that passes through it is filtered and interpreted. However, the world the reader encounters in literature is already  processed and filtered by another consciousness.
(C) The existing world faced by the individual is in principle an infinite chaos of events and details before it is organized by a human mind. This chaos only gets processed and modified when perceived by a human mind. [3점]
* deviate: 벗어나다 ** endow: 부여하다 *** heritage: 유산
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Cinema is valuable not for its ability to make visible the hidden outlines of our reality, but for its ability to reveal what reality itself veils ― the dimension of fantasy. ( ① ) This is why, to a person, the first great theorists of film decried the introduction of sound and other technical innovations (such as color) that pushed film in the direction of realism. ( ② ) Since cinema was an entirely fantasmatic art, these innovations were completely unnecessary. ( ③ ) And what’s worse, they could do nothing but turn filmmakers and audiences away from the fantasmatic dimension of cinema, potentially transforming  film into a mere delivery  device  for  representations  of reality. ( ④ ) But sound and color threatened to create just  such an illusion, thereby destroying the very essence of film art. ( ⑤ ) As Rudolf Arnheim puts it, “The creative power of the artist can only come into play where reality and the  medium of representation do not coincide.” [3점]
* decry: 공공연히 비난하다 ** fantasmatic: 환상의

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Introduction of robots into factories, while employment of human workers is being reduced, creates worry and fear. ( ① ) It is  the responsibility of management to prevent or, at least, to ease these fears. ( ② ) For example, robots could be introduced only in new plants rather than replacing humans in existing assembly lines. ( ③ ) Workers should be included in the planning for new factories or the introduction of robots into existing plants, so they can participate in the process. ( ④ ) It may be that robots are needed to reduce manufacturing costs so that the company remains competitive, but planning for such cost reductions should be done jointly by labor and management. ( ⑤ ) Since robots are particularly good at highly repetitive simple motions, the replaced human workers should be moved to positions where judgment and decisions beyond the abilities of robots  are required.










(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① least	… patterns	② fixed … features
③ limited … functions	④ fixed … rules
⑤ least	… assumptions


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)













(C)
(D) 












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Similarities of Strategies in Sales and Language Learning
② Classification: An Inherent Characteristic of Language
③ Exploring Linguistic Issues Through Categorization
④ Is a Ready-Made Classification System Truly Better?
⑤ Dilemmas of Using Classification in Language Education

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Anna는 신입 회원에게 태권도를 가르쳤다.
② Anna와 Jane은 Cora를 보고 놀라지 않았다.
③ Anna는 Cora에게 태권도 도복을 사 주었다.
④ Cora는 여러 차례 연습에 참여하지 않았다.
⑤ Anna는 Cora를 대다수의 신입 회원과 다를 것이라 생각했다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2020학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Hurry up, or you’ll be late for school.
② Sure, why not? Let’s go pick up your dad.
③ I’m sorry but the school bus has already left.
④ Okay. I’ll drive you to school tomorrow morning.
⑤ Well, he’s too busy working so he couldn’t make it.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Of course. This is the latest model.
② Really? Then, I need to get it fixed.
③ Don’t worry. Here’s a bandage for you.
④ Right. You should have been more careful.
⑤ Let me pay for the repair. It’s all my fault.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 미세 먼지 차단용 마스크의 착용을 권장하려고
② 고농도 미세 먼지의 발생 원인에 대해 설명하려고
③ 미세 먼지에 대비한 건강 관리법 강연을 홍보하려고
④ 미세 먼지 절감을 위한 캠페인에 동참할 것을 호소하려고
⑤ 미세 먼지 경보 발령에 따른 실외 활동 자제를 당부하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 여행 중에는 비상 연락처를 항상 소지해야 한다.
② 여행 시 치안이 불안한 장소에는 가지 말아야 한다.
③ 현금이나 귀중품은 최소한만 가지고 여행해야 한다.
④ 여행지의 기후를 고려하여 여벌 옷을 가져가야 한다.
⑤ 여행지에서는 관광객처럼 보이는 복장을 피해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 안무가  ? 무대 감독	② 무용 강사 ? 수강생
③ 가구  제작자 ? 의뢰인	④ 의상 디자이너 ? 무용수
⑤ 카메라 감독 ? 소품 담당자

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 침실 창문 닫기
② 식료품 사러 가기
③ 게임기 수리 맡기기
④ 영화 예매권 환불하기
⑤ 아들 친구 데려다주기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 금요일에 Poetry Night에 가지 않는 이유 를 고르시오.
① 병원에 가야 해서
② 침대를 조립해야 해서
③ 이삿짐을 포장해야 해서
④ 동아리 모임에 가야 해서
⑤ 아파트 청소를 해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $44	② $46	③ $48	④ $50	⑤ $52

10.대화를  듣고,  도장  만들기  수업에  관해  언급되지  않은  것을 고르시오.
① 사용 언어	② 참가비	③ 소요 시간
④ 장소	⑤ 인원 제한

1.Campbell Challenge Program에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Challenge를 하나 이상 신청할 수 있다.
② Challenge의 목록은 학교 웹 사이트에 탑재되어 있다.
③ 한번 선택한 Challenge는 변경할 수 없다.
④ Challenge별 필수 요건을 충족하면 수료증을 받는다.
⑤ 등록은 3월 23일까지 온라인으로 가능하다.




2	영어 영역


12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  선택한  비디오  스 트리밍 상품을 고르시오.
Video Streaming Subscription Plans

①
②
③
④
⑤

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?



13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Sorry. I don’t know much about biology.
② I doubt I can come. Africa is too far away.
③ Exactly. That’s an advantage of team teaching.
④ That’s true. Some students prefer to study alone.
⑤ Not yet. I’m not ready to try the teaching model.

14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Me, neither. I’m not into cooking videos.
② Okay. I’ll keep uploading videos on my channel.
③ I’d rather not. It’s too late to start a new project.
④ Thanks for your offer. I’m happy to work with you.
⑤ You’ve got a point. I’ll try to reduce my screen time.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Scott이  Jane에게  할  말로  가장  적절  한 것을 고르시오.
Scott:  	
① Being well prepared will help you overcome your fear.
② Come on. You can make up for the mistake next time.
③ It was an excellent presentation. I’m quite impressed.
④ Remember that a long speech can bore the audience.
⑤ You should take the psychology class this semester.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① recycling household plastic items
② reducing microplastics in the house
③ extensive use of plastic in medicine
④ technologies to remove plastic waste
⑤ environmental impact of microplastics

17.언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① carpets	② toys	③ toothpastes
④ air purifier	⑤ bottled water




① 교향악단의 연주회 일정을 안내하려고
② 상임 지휘자의 은퇴 공연을 홍보하려고
③ 교향악단에 대한 지원 확충을 촉구하려고
④ 음악 감독 겸 상임 지휘자 초빙을 공지하려고
⑤ 교향악단의 정기 연주회를 위한 장소를 섭외하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 Melanie의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　After going through her routine chores as a nanny, Melanie realized how quiet the house was without Edith and Harry stirring around in it. She realized that she couldn’t hear any noise other than the ones she made. She missed Edith. She missed Harry. She felt alone in this big house without the twins. Suddenly she realized that she’d never been in any other rooms except her bedroom and the twins’. It occurred to her that the study upstairs was always kept closed. She wondered what interesting things would be there. Books? Magazines? Perhaps... a beautiful painting? She couldn’t resist herself and started heading up the stairs.
① lonely → curious	② surprised → worried
③ indifferent → upset	④ comfortable → annoyed
⑤ disappointed → relieved

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　It’s unfortunate that when something goes wrong, people obsess about why it happened, whose fault it was, and “why me?” Honestly, what good is that thinking in most cases? Train your brain to be solution­oriented. Let’s take the simplest example on the planet. What happens when a glass of milk spills? Yes, you can obsess and say, how did that fall, who made it fall, will it stain the floor, or think something along the lines of, “Why always me? I’m in a hurry and don’t need this.” But someone with a solution­oriented thought process would simply get a towel, pick up the glass, and get a new glass of milk. Use your energy wisely; learn from mistakes but then move on fast with solutions.
① 문제가 생기면 주위 사람들에게 조언을 구하라.
② 비판하는 사람보다 격려하는 사람을 가까이하라.
③ 실패의 경험을 분석해서 배우려는 자세를 가져라.
④ 문제 자체에 집착하기보다는 문제 해결에 집중하라.
⑤ 예상치 못한 위험에 대비해 항상 경계를 늦추지 마라.




영어 영역	3


21.밑줄  친  live  in  the  tightest  echo  chambers가  다음  글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　What happens when students get the message that saying the wrong thing can get you in trouble? They do what one would expect: they talk to people they already agree with, keep their mouths shut about important topics in mixed company, and often don’t bother even arguing with the angriest or loudest person in the room. The result is a group polarization that follows graduates into the real world. As the sociologist Diana C. Mutz discovered in her book  Hearing    the    Other    Side,    those  with  the  highest  levels  of education have the  lowest  exposure  to  people  with conflicting points of view, while those who have not graduated from high school can claim the most diverse discussion mates. In other words, those most likely to live in the tightest echo chambers are those with the highest level of education. It should be the opposite, shouldn’t it? A good education ought to teach citizens to actively seek out the opinions of intelligent people with whom they disagree, in order to prevent the problem of “confirmation bias.”
① hear only the voices that strengthen their views
② have mixed feelings towards the academic world
③ find their followers from every corner of society
④ be responsive to emotional cues from their peers
⑤ blame educational systems for the social polarization



2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Some company leaders say that their company is going through a lot of change and stress, which they “know” will lower their effectiveness, drive away top talent, and tear apart their teams. They need to think about the military, a place where stress and uncertainty are the status quo, and where employees are on­boarded not with a beach vacation but with boot camp. And yet, the employees of the military remain among the highest functioning, steadfast, and loyal of virtually any organization on the planet. That’s because after centuries of practice, the military has learned that if you go through stress with the right lens, and alongside others, you can create meaningful narratives and social bonds that you will talk about for the rest of your life. Instead of seeing stress as a threat, the military culture derives pride from the shared resilience it creates. And this has nothing to do with the fact that they are soldiers; every company and team can turn stress into wellsprings of potential.
* status quo: 현 상태 ** boot camp: 신병 훈련소
① 적절한 긴장감은 사고를 예방하는 데 도움이 된다.
② 신속함보다는 정확한 업무 처리가 생산성을 개선한다.
③ 목표 설정이 구체적일수록 성과를 빨리 달성할 수 있다.
④ 인적 자원에 대한 투자는 조직에 대한 충성심을 높인다.
⑤ 스트레스를 조직의 잠재력을 끌어낼 계기로 삼을 수 있다.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Inspiration is a funny thing. It’s powerful enough to move mountains. When it strikes, it carries an author forward like the rushing torrents of a flooded river. And yet, if you wait for it, nothing happens. The irony is that so much is actually created ― mountains moved, sagas written, grand murals painted ― by those who might not even describe themselves as particularly inspired. Instead, they show up every day and put their hands on the keyboard, their pen to paper, and they move their stories forward, bit by bit, word by word, perhaps not even recognizing that inspiration is striking in hundreds of tiny, microscopic ways as they push through another sentence, another page, another chapter. “I write when the spirit moves me, and the spirit moves me every day,” said William Faulkner. This is the principle way writers finish 50,000 words of a novel each year during National Novel Writing Month ― by showing up ― and it applies to being creative the rest of the year as well.
* torrent: 급류 ** saga: 대하소설
① crucial roles of persistent effort in creative writing
② distinctive features of popular contemporary novels
③ importance of detailed description in writing fiction
④ revival of reading novels as a form of entertainment
⑤ classical literature as a timeless source of inspiration



24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Hierarchies are good at weeding out obviously bad ideas. By the time an idea makes it all the way up the chain, it will have been compared to all the other ideas in the system, with the obviously good ideas ranked at the top. This seems like common sense. The problem is that obviously good ideas are not truly innovative, and truly innovative ideas often look like very bad ideas when they’re introduced. Western Union famously passed on the opportunity to buy Alexander Graham Bell’s patents and technology for the telephone. At the time, phone calls were extremely noisy and easy to misinterpret, and they couldn’t span long distances, and Western Union knew from its telegram business that profitable communication depended on accuracy and widespread reach. And Wikipedia was considered a joke when it started. How could something written by a crowd replace the work of the world’s top scholars? Today it is so much more comprehensive than anything that came before it that it’s widely considered the only encyclopedia.
① When Innovation Turns into Disappointment
② Why We Are Attracted to Daring Innovation
③ How Hierarchies Miss Out on Innovative Ideas
④ Collective Intelligence: A Tool for Breakthroughs
⑤ Patents: Fundamental Assets for Innovative Firms




4	영어 영역


25.다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Estimated Job Creation  and  Displacement  from  AI in the U.K. by 2037


Industry sector% of existing jobs (in 2017)Creation (A)Displacement (B)Net effect (A - B)Health & social work34%12%22%Professional, scientific & technical33%18%15%Education12%5%7%Wholesale & retail trade26%28%-2%Manufacturing5%30%-25%　The table above shows percentage estimates of the job creation and displacement from Artificial Intelligence (AI) in five industry sectors in the U.K. by 2037 compared with existing jobs in 2017. ① The health & social work sector is estimated to undergo job creation of more than 30%, with a positive net effect of 22%. ② The manufacturing sector is anticipated to suffer a displacement of 30% of its existing jobs in 2017 with only 5% of job creation. ③ More than one in four jobs in 2017 are estimated to be displaced in the wholesale & retail trade sector. ④ The percentage of job creation in the professional, scientific & technical sector is estimated to be more than double that of job displacement in the same sector. ⑤ The job creation percentage of the education sector is projected to be higher than that of the manufacturing sector.

27.Stockholm Ghost  Tours에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하  지 않는 것은?






Friday&Saturday6:00p.m. - 7:30p.m.SundaytoThursday6:30p.m. - 8:00p.m.







① Stockholm의 오래된 거리를 걷는다.
② 일요일에는 오후 6시 30분에 시작한다.
③ 요일에 따라 출발하는 장소가 다르다.
④ 6세 이하 어린이는 무료로 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 표를 온라인으로 미리 구매할 수 있다.

* displacement: 대체, 해고

26.Virginia Apgar에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Born in 1909, Virginia Apgar was determined to succeed in the field of medicine. She graduated from medical school and completed an internship in surgery. But she soon found that her employment options were limited. Apgar tried something new, focusing her efforts on anesthesiology. After being denied several times, she was accepted into a training program in anesthesiology. As Apgar studied, she became interested in the way anesthesia given to mothers in labor affected babies. During this time, she developed the Apgar score, which is a method of checking the health of a newborn. According to the method, doctors must consider five different factors, including heart rate and breathing effort, when they inspect babies. She received many awards including an honorary doctorate from the Women’s Medical College of Pennsylvania in 1964. In 1973, she was also elected Woman of  the  Year  in  Science  by  the Ladies  Home Journal.


28.2020  K­Culture  Video  Contest에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 일치하는 것은?









K­PopSing and dance to K­popK­DramaAct out a scene from a K­drama
* anesthesiology: 마취학
① 의과 대학 졸업 후 외과에서 인턴 과정을 마쳤다.
② 단번에 마취학 훈련 과정 입학을 허가받았다.
③ 산모 마취가 아기에게 미치는 영향에 관심을 가졌다.
④ 신생아의 건강을 확인하는 방법을 개발했다.
⑤ 명예박사 학위를 포함하여 많은 상을 받았다.


① 거주 국가와 상관없이 누구나 참가할 수 있다.
② 제작한 영상을 USB 메모리에 저장해서 제출해야 한다.
③ 두 개의 분야 중 한 가지만 선택할 수 있다.
④ 1등 상품은 서울행 왕복 항공권 두 장이다.
⑤ 수상 결과는 7월 중 온라인으로 발표된다.




영어 영역	5


29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은?
　When children are young, much of the work is demonstrating to them that they ① do have control. One wise friend of ours who was a parent educator for twenty years ② advises giving calendars to preschool­age children and writing down all the important events in their life, in part because it helps children understand the passage of time better, and how their days will unfold. We can’t overstate the importance of the calendar tool in helping kids feel in control of their day. Have them ③ cross off days of the week as you come to them. Spend time going over the schedule for the day, giving them choice in that schedule wherever ④ possible. This communication expresses respect

― they see that they are not just a tagalong to your day and your plans, and they understand what is going to happen, when, and why. As they get older, children will then start to write in important things for themselves, ⑤ it further helps them develop their sense of control.













30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Random errors may be detected by ① repeating the measurements. Furthermore, by taking more and more readings, we obtain from the arithmetic mean a value which approaches more and more closely to the true value. Neither of these points is true for a systematic error. Repeated measurements with the same apparatus neither ② reveal nor do they eliminate a systematic error. For this reason systematic errors are potentially more ③ dangerous than random errors. If large random errors are present in an experiment, they will manifest themselves in a large value of the final quoted error. Thus everyone is ④ unaware of the imprecision of the result, and no harm is done ― except possibly to the ego of the experimenter when no one takes notice of his or her results. However, the concealed presence of a systematic error may lead to an apparently ⑤ reliable result, given with a small estimated error, which is in fact seriously wrong.
* arithmetic mean: 산술 평균 ** apparatus: 도구

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31.A  distinct  emotional  trait  of  human  nature  is  to  watch fellow humans closely, to learn their stories, and thereby to judge their character and dependability. And so it has ever been since the Pleistocene. The first bands classifiable to  the genus Homo and their descendants were hunter­gatherers.  Like  the  Kalahari  Ju/’hoansi  of  today,  they almost certainly depended on sophisticated cooperative behavior just to survive from one day to the next. That, in turn, required exact knowledge of the personal history and accomplishments of each of their groupmates, and equally they needed an empathetic sense of the feelings and propensities of others. It gives deep satisfaction ? call it, if you will, a human instinct ? not just to learn but also to share emotions stirred by the stories told by  our companions. The whole of these performances pays off in survival and reproduction.	are Darwinian phenomena.
* the Pleistocene: 홍적세(洪積世) ** propensity: (행동의) 성향
① Gossip and storytelling
② Planning and practicing
③ Executing and revising
④ Exhibition and jealousy
⑤ Competitions and rewards



32.Scaling    up    from    the    small    to    the    large    is    often accompanied by an evolution from simplicity to complexity while 	. This is familiar in engineering, economics, companies, cities, organisms, and, perhaps most dramatically, evolutionary process. For example, a skyscraper in a large city is a significantly more complex object than a modest family dwelling in a small town, but the underlying principles of construction and design, including questions of mechanics, energy and information distribution, the size of electrical outlets, water faucets, telephones, laptops, doors, etc., all remain approximately the same independent of the size of the building. Similarly, organisms have evolved to have an enormous range of sizes and an extraordinary diversity of morphologies and interactions, which often reflect increasing complexity, yet fundamental building blocks like cells, mitochondria, capillaries, and even leaves do not appreciably change with body size or increasing complexity of the class of systems in which they are embedded. [3점]
* morphology: 형태 ** capillary: 모세관
① maintaining basic elements unchanged or conserved
② optimizing energy use for the structural growth
③ assigning new functions to existing components
④ incorporating foreign items from surroundings
⑤ accelerating the elimination of useless parts




6	영어 영역


3.Knowing who an author is and what his or her likely intentions are in creating text or artwork is tremendously important to most of us. Not knowing who wrote, or created, some artwork is often very frustrating. Our culture places great worth on the identity of speakers, writers, and artists. Perhaps the single most important aspect of “authorship” is the vaguely apprehended presence of human creativity, personality, and authority that nominal authorship seems to provide. It is almost unthinkable for a visitor to an art museum to admire a roomful of paintings without knowing the names of the individual painters, or for a reader not to know who the writer is of the novel she is reading. Publishers proudly display authors’ names on the jackets, spines and title pages of their books. Book advertisements in The            New              York                    Review                          of        Books                          and     The              New              York                     Times Book Review regularly include pictures of authors and quote authors as they talk about their work, both of which show that 	. [3점]
① book advertising strategies are being diversified
② our interest is as much in authors as in their books
③ authors are influenced by popular works of their time
④ book cover designs show who their target readers are
⑤ book writing is increasingly dictated by book marketing



34. All athletes have an innate preference for task­ or ego­involved goals in sport. These predispositions, referred to  as  task  and  ego  goal  orientations, are  believed  to  develop throughout childhood largely due to the types of people the athletes come in contact with and the situations they are placed in. If children consistently receive parental praise depending on their effort and recognition for personal improvement from their coaches, and are encouraged to learn from their mistakes, then they are likely to foster a task orientation. It becomes natural for them to believe that success is associated with mastery, effort, understanding, and personal responsibility. The behavior of their role models in sport also affects this development. Such an environment is far different from one where children are shaped by rewards for winning (alone), praise for the best grades, criticism or non­selection despite making their best effort, or coaches whose style is to hand out unequal recognition. This kind of environment helps an ego orientation to flourish, along with the belief that
 	. [3점]
* predisposition: 성향
① not the result but the process is what matters most
② an athlete’s abilities will blossom with image training
③ cooperation, rather than competition, builds up a team
④ ability and talent, not effort and personal endeavor, earn success
⑤ the athletes’ peers, not the coaches, are the true judge of their performance

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　The genre film simplifies film watching as well as filmmaking. In a western, because of the conventions of appearance, dress, and manners, we recognize the hero, sidekick, villain, etc., on sight and assume they will not violate our expectations of their conventional roles. ① Our familiarity with the genre makes watching not only easier but in some ways more enjoyable. ② Because we know and are familiar with all the conventions, we gain pleasure from recognizing each character, each image, each familiar situation. ③ The fact that the conventions are established and repeated intensifies another kind of pleasure. ④ Genre mixing is not an innovation of the past few decades; it was already an integral part of the film business in the era of classical cinema. ⑤ Settled into a comfortable genre, with our basic expectations satisfied, we become more keenly aware of and responsive to the creative variations, refinements, and complexities that make the film seem fresh and original, and by exceeding our expectations, each innovation becomes an exciting surprise.






[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것 을 고르시오.
36.
　Many people cannot understand what there is about birds to become obsessed about. What are bird­watchers actually doing out there in the woods, swamps, and fields?
(A) And because birders are human, these birding memories
― like most human memories ― improve over time. The colors of the plumages become richer, the songs sweeter, and those elusive field marks more vivid and distinct in retrospect.
(B) The key to comprehending the passion of birding is to realize that bird­watching is really a hunt. But unlike hunting, the trophies you accumulate are in your mind.
(C) Of course, your mind is a great place to populate with them because you carry them around with you wherever you go. You don’t leave them to gather dust on a wall or up in the attic. Your birding experiences become part of your life, part of who you are.
* plumage: 깃털 ** in retrospect: 돌이켜 생각해 보면
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7

37.	39.



(A) It is the statement that is in bold print or the boxed insert in newspaper and magazine articles. As such, compression techniques accentuate another important temporal dimension of television ― rhythm and tempo.
(B) More important, television performers, or people who depend on television, such as politicians, are evaluated by viewers (voters) on their ability to meet time compression requirements, such as the one sentence graphic statement or metaphor to capture the moment.
(C) The familiar result is a compressed event in which action flows with rapid ease, compacting hours or even days into minutes, and minutes into seconds. Audiences are spared the waiting common to everyday life. Although this use of time may appear unnatural in the abstract, the television audience has come to expect it, and critics demand it. [3점]
* accentuate: 강조하다
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.


　If there is any field that is associated with seeing rather than with hearing, it is science. Scholars who emphasize the visual bias in Western culture even point to science as their favorite example. ( ① ) Because doing research seems impossible without using images, graphs, and diagrams, science is ― in their view ― a visual  endeavor par excellence. ( ② ) They stress that scientific work involves more than visual observation. ( ③ ) The introduction of measurement devices that merely seem to require the reading of results and thus seeing has not ruled out the deployment of the scientists’ other senses. ( ④ ) On the contrary, scientific work in experimental settings often calls for bodily skills, one of which is listening. ( ⑤ ) The world of science itself, however, still considers listening a less objective entrance into knowledge production than seeing.
* deployment: 사용
　
Attitudes toward technological progress are shaped by how people’s incomes are affected by it. Economists think about progress in terms of enabling and replacing technologies. ( ① ) The telescope, whose invention allowed astronomers to gaze at the moons of Jupiter, did not displace laborers in large numbers
─ instead, it enabled us to perform new and previously unimaginable tasks. ( ② ) Thus, it stands to reason that when technologies take the form of capital that replaces workers, they are more likely to be resisted. ( ③ ) The spread of every technology is a decision, and if some people stand to lose their jobs as a consequence, adoption will not be frictionless. ( ④ ) Progress is not inevitable and for some it is not even desirable. ( ⑤ ) Though it is often taken as a given, there is no fundamental reason why technological ingenuity should always be allowed to thrive. [3점]
* loom: 직조기 ** ingenuity: 창의성

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Bringing a certain intellectual authority into a classroom does not need to silence the more insecure voices of the less confident students. Correcting the students requires a high level of sensitivity on the part of the teacher. It does not mean that there is no need to correct, but the correction should not lead to silencing the student. An authoritarian form of correction often prompts even the very brightest of students to withdraw from an uncomfortable situation, let alone those students who are less secure about their own intellectual potential. It also kills the willingness to entertain more risky interpretations. Instead of simply accepting any interpretation just for the sake of the freedom of expression, it is most advisable to question the student about how he/she arrived at their interpretation. This approach creates a community of thinkers, who demonstrate that what is at stake is not the superiority of the opinion based on the hierarchy of the author, but a realization that we belong together in our investigating the matter in question.
?

(A) (B)
① withdrawn ······ understanding
② withdrawn ······ goals
③ sensitive ······ insecurity
④ competitive ······ achievements
⑤ competitive ······ feelings




8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)







(C)
　“Hey, Bernard,” the man spoke again as there came a big wave, and he moved his own board well out of the way, “you take this wave.” It was classic Hawaiian culture, where giving what you have is always the first order of things. Farrelly thanked him and farewelled (c) him at the moment the swell rose to a roaring beauty. With the setting sun, he was surfing his way back to his wife. “That,” he told her, “was the perfect wave.”

(D)
　Things on the beachfront had changed a lot. The beach and surf, however, were as pure and magical as ever, so
(d) he was eager to ride on the Hawaiian surf once again. While his wife stayed in the car, Farrelly took his board out. The further out he got, the more freedom he felt. In the gathering dusk, just one other surfer was there, a large native Hawaiian. Farrelly, an Australian visitor to these shores, kept (e) his distance.


41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Concept of Evolutionary Design: A Biological Nonsense
② Pleasure­Seeking Instinct Propels Us to Adventure
③ Why Do We Cling to Absurd­Looking Promises?
④ Are We Programmed to Be Keener to Threats?
⑤ Worries: An Excuse for Persistent Inaction


42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e)  중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Bernard Farrelly was one of the greatest of Australian surfers in history. In 1964, he became the first non­Hawaiian to win a major surfing contest at Makaha beach, Hawaii. After more than forty years, by then fairly forgotten in this part of the world, (a) he happened to be passing through Hawaii with his wife, and decided to go back to the beach for a look.

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과  다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 Bernard Farrelly에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 하와이의 서핑 대회에서 우승한 적이 있었다.
② 그를 기억하는 하와이 원주민 서퍼를 만났다.
③ 하와이 문화에 따라 큰 파도를 동료에게 양보했다.
④ 해 질 무렵에 파도를 탔다.
⑤ 아내를 차에 둔 채 파도를 타러 갔다.







제 3 교시

2018학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not yet. I’ll try it later.
② Sorry, but I don’t like insects.
③ Don’t worry. I won’t bother you.
④ Yes. It’s in the bathroom cabinet.
⑤ Keep it out of the children’s reach.



2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. I’ll be there after my lesson.
② Sorry, my old 3D printer is broken.
③ Yes, it was cheaper than I expected.
④ Right. I used to enjoy playing tennis.
⑤ That’s okay. I have another appointment.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 반려동물 입양 절차를 안내하려고
② 동물 구조 시 유의사항을 설명하려고
③ 동물보호법 개정의 필요성을 알리려고
④ 비영리 단체를 위한 재정적 후원을 요청하려고
⑤ 유기동물보호단체  자원봉사 참여를 권유하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자신의 주장을 글 속에서 반복해서 언급해야 한다.
② 글쓰기 전에 타인의 글을 많이 읽어보는 것이 좋다.
③ 결론을  먼저 쓰는 것이 논리적  글쓰기에  도움이 된다.
④ 글쓰기  시 독자의  수준에  맞는 어휘 선택이 필요하다.
⑤ 글의 요지를 뒷받침하는 구체적 근거를 제시해야 한다.

5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
①  사진사 ― 교사	② 화가 ― 미술관 직원
③ 무대  연출가 ― 학생	④ 의상 디자이너 ― 모델
⑤ 공원 관리인 ― 관광객
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 할인쿠폰 다운받기	② 사진 전송하기
③ 놀이공원 예약하기	④ 선물 구입하기
⑤ 가족여행 계획하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 English Literature Conference에서 발표 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 취업  면접을  봐야 해서
② 문학  특강을  해야 해서
③ 해외  출장을  가야 해서
④ 논문 심사를 받아야 해서
⑤ 학술제 사회를 맡아야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $380	② $450	③ $480	④ $730	⑤ $750

10. 대화를 듣고, sports climbing course에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 강좌 기간	② 수강 인원	③ 수업 장소
④ 수강료	⑤ 수업 준비물

11. Tubo Hotel에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 재활용 콘크리트 관으로 지어졌다.
② 2010년에 개장했다.
③ Mexico City의 남쪽에 위치한다.
④ 20개의 객실을 보유하고 있다.
⑤ 객실 내 두 개의 욕실이 구비되어 있다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 예약할 연극을 고르시오.
Springfield Theater Festival

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Sorry, but my daughters need the books.
② Okay, let me return the books by 8 p.m.
③ Then, I’ll bring the books in the afternoon.
④ It’s not possible to receive them at the moment.
⑤ Right. Children should read many kinds of books.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Just try to stay calm during an emergency.
② Yes. Your dad brought one home yesterday.
③ Right. Let’s find out if we can get one online.
④ That’s why we have a fire drill every semester.
⑤ Of course. You should learn how to use it correctly.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jack이 Carol에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jack:  	
① It’s important to have detailed daily plans.
② I really appreciate your devotion to the club.
③ Why don’t you practice regularly on your own?
④ I won’t be able to attend practices in the morning.
⑤ How about having extra practices before school starts?

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① insects that feed on insects
② roles of insects in nature
③ insects harmful to plants
④ ways insects defend themselves
⑤ factors threatening insects’ survival

17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① dragonflies	② ants	③ tiger beetles
④ mosquitoes	⑤ ladybugs


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 임금 인상 요구를 거절하려고
② 업무부서  배정 결과를 통지하려고
③ 신규 사업 아이디어를  제안하려고
④ 실적이 우수한 사원을  격려하려고
⑤ 연수 일정 변경에 대해 항의하려고
19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A horse’s cry came from one of the far barns. Marvin rushed over to it and saw that the entire back of the barn was coated in flames, but a horse was standing at the very front. Instincts told him it was Ewinar. The tiny brown colt was going crazy and kicking like a horse that was never tamed. Marvin put his hands to the barn door handle, and it was hot. Marvin ignored the screaming pain on his hand and opened the barn door. He threw the halter on Ewinar with amazing quickness. Marvin pulled the lead rope by Ewinar’s side and the horse walked on. He began walking faster, forcing Marvin to jog to keep up with him. The barn floor had been littered with highly flammable straw, and the fire was chasing him and the colt as they raced away.
* colt: 수망아지 ** halter: 고삐
① lively and festive	② solemn and sacred
③ mysterious and odd	④ urgent and desperate
⑤ boring and monotonous

20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A popular notion with regard to creativity is that constraints hinder our creativity and the most innovative results come from people who have “unlimited” resources. Research shows, however, that creativity loves constraints. In our own agency, we did the best work when we had limited time and client resources. You had to be more creative just to make everything work harder. I have often said our marketing teams were more creative on $5 million accounts than $100 million accounts. Today, when working with startups, I am amazed at the creativity you have to have when you only have $25,000. Perhaps companies should do just the opposite ―intentionally apply limits to take advantage of the creative potential of their people.
① 창의성은 성공적인 마케팅을 위한 필수 요소이다.
② 조직 내 활발한  소통이  창의적인  결과를 낳는다.
③ 방향성이 결여된 창의성은 기업 발전을 저해한다.
④ 성과를 강조하는 기업 문화는 구성원의 창의성을 억압한다.
⑤ 사용할 수 있는 자원이 제한적일 때 창의성이 더 잘 발현된다.




영어 영역	3

21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The most common settlement form is nuclear. Most rural people live in houses clustered in a village with forest and grassland lying beyond. The settlement land use protects most households from any insect­transmitted diseases from woods and fields. The nuclear form, however, facilitates the fecal contamination of water sources and the spread of directly contagious  diseases.  Houses  in   a  dispersed  settlement form are located on farmland, and neither air nor water provides much focus of contagion for the scattered population. Each household, however, is exposed to vectored diseases originating in the natural surroundings. A linear settlement, in which houses are lined up along both sides of a river, canal, or road, has an intermediary position and often is characterized by the worst conditions of the other two settlement forms. People are only partially protected from insect­transmitted diseases because the rear of the dwelling is exposed; yet the clustering of houses provides a focus for contagion.
* fecal: 배설물의 ** vectored: 곤충(동물) 매개의
① historical changes of the spatial arrangement of houses
② effect of settlement patterns on the spread of diseases
③ geographical characteristics of large residential zones
④ practical measures for preventing contagious diseases
⑤ migration of diseases from rural to urban areas





[22~23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. The American anthropologist Margaret Mead once said, “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.” This same concept was echoed by Kelly Johnson: “The number of people having any connection with the project must be restricted in an almost vicious manner.” There are pretty good reasons for these opinions. Large or even medium­sized groups ― corporations, movements, whatever ― aren’t built to be flexible, nor are they willing to take large risks. Such organizations are designed to make steady progress and have considerably too much to lose to place the big bets that certain breakthroughs require. Fortunately, this is not the case with small groups. With no bureaucracy, little to lose, and a passion to prove themselves, when it comes to innovation, small teams consistently outperform larger organizations.
* vicious: 심한
① Don’t Let Relationships Bind You
② Risks: The Chance to Make Groups Grow
③ Size Matters! The Bigger, the More Efficient
④ Why Small Teams Surpass Their Bigger Counterparts
⑤ Different Obstacles Faced by Small and Large Teams
23. 
Even though media coverage of sports is carefully edited and represented in total entertainment packages, most of us believe that when we see a sport event on television, we are seeing it “the way it is.” We don’t usually think that what we see, hear, and read is a series of narratives and images selected for particular reasons and grounded in the social worlds and interests of those producing the event, controlling the images, and delivering the commentary. Television coverage provides only one of many possible sets of images and narratives related to an event, and there are many images and messages that audiences do not receive. If we went to an event in person, we would see something quite different from the images selected and presented on television, and we would develop our own descriptions and interpretations, which would be very different from those carefully presented by media commentators.
① Televised Sports: A Partial Reflection of a Sports Event
② How Media Limits the Popularity of Some Sports
③ Can We Get Better at Sports Just by Watching?
④ What Makes Sports Fans So Enthusiastic?
⑤ Sports Can Tear Down Social Barriers

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The charts above show the results of a 2017 U.S. survey on the perceptions of gender differences and their origins. ①When it comes to how they express their feelings, their physical abilities, and their approach to parenting, more than half of respondents say men and women are basically different. ②Among the four items surveyed, the one with the biggest percentage of the response “different” is how they express their feelings. ③On the other hand, the item for which the most people choose the response “similar” is the things they are good at in the workplace, and the response rate is 63 percent. ④For all items except their physical abilities, the percentages of respondents saying that differences are mostly based on society are larger than those of people who say differences are mostly based on biology. ⑤In the case of their physical abilities, however, the percentage of people who say differences are mostly based on biology is more than four times that of those who say differences are mostly based on society.




4	영어 영역


25. saola에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The saola, also known as the Vu Quong ox, is an endangered, nocturnal forest­dwelling ox weighing about 100 kilograms. Its habitat is the dense mountain forests in the Annamite Mountains, which run through the Lao PDR and Vietnam. The saola is generally considered the greatest animal discovery of recent times. First documented in Vietnam in 1992, it is so different from any other known species that a separate genus had to be created for it. The saola stays at higher elevations during the wetter summer season, when streams at these altitudes have plenty of water, and moves down to the lowlands in winter, when the mountain streams dry up. They are said to travel mostly in groups of two or three animals. Hunting and the loss of forest habitat due to logging and conversion to farmland threaten its survival.
* nocturnal: 야행성의 ** genus: [생물] 속(屬)
① 무게가 100킬로그램 정도 나간다.
② 1992년에 베트남에서 처음으로 기록되었다.
③ 여름에는 저지대에 머물고 겨울에는 고지대로 이동한다.
④ 주로 두세 마리씩  무리지어  다닌다고  알려져 있다.
⑤ 사냥과  삼림 서식지의  감소로  생존이 위협 받는다.

26. 2018 Pegasus Drone Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 참가자들은 배송용 드론을 제출한다.
② 16세 이상이면 누구나 참가 가능하다.
③ 출품작은 수직 이착륙이 가능해야 한다.
④ 출품작의 최대 속력은 시속 200킬로미터를 넘어서는 안 된다.
⑤ 참가자 전원은 York Air Festival 입장권을 받는다.
27. 
Refugee Hope Box에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 보내는 물품의 무게는 제한이 없다.
② 물품을 신발 상자에 담는다.
③ 기관으로 보내는 물품의 배송료는 기관이 부담한다.
④ 물품 수령자의 대상 연령은 표시하지 않는다.
⑤ 식품, 의약품, 헌옷을 기증 받는다.





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　When it comes to medical treatment, patients see choice as both a blessing and a burden. And the burden falls primarily on women, who are ① typically the guardians not only of their own health, but that of their husbands and children. “It is an overwhelming task for women, and consumers in general, ② to be able to sort through the information they find and make decisions,” says Amy Allina, program director of the National Women’s Health Network. And what makes it overwhelming is not only that the decision is ours, but that the number of sources of information ③ which we are to make the decisions has exploded. It’s not just a matter of listening to your doctor lay out the options and ④ making a choice. We now have encyclopedic lay­people’s guides to health, “better health” magazines, and the Internet. So now the prospect of medical decisions ⑤ has become everyone’s worst nightmare of a term paper assignment, with stakes infinitely higher than a grade in a course.
* lay­people: 비전문가




영어 영역	5

29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　According to Derek Bickerton, human ancestors and relatives such as the Neanderthals may have had a relatively large lexicon of words, each of which related to a mental concept such as ‘meat’, ‘fire’, ‘hunt’ and so forth. They were able to string such words together but could do so only in a nearly (A) arbitrary / consistent fashion. Bickerton recognizes that this could result in some ambiguity. For instance, would ‘man killed bear’ have meant that a man has killed a bear or that a bear has killed a man? Ray Jackendoff, a cognitive scientist, suggests that simple rules such as ‘agent­first’ (that is, the man killed the bear) might have (B) increased / reduced the potential ambiguity. Nevertheless, the number and complexity of potential utterances would have been severely limited. The transformation of such proto­language into language required the (C) destruction / evolution of grammar ― rules that define the order in which a finite number of words can be strung together to create an infinite number of utterances, each with a specific meaning.
* lexicon: 어휘 목록 ** proto­language: 원시 언어

(A)(B)(C)①arbitrary……increased……destruction②arbitrary……reduced……evolution③arbitrary……reduced……destruction④consistent……reduced……evolution⑤consistent……increased……destruction





30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? A notable and celebrated contemporary of Alfred Nobel was G?sta Mittag­Leffler. Mittag­Leffler, a student of the celebrated mathematician Karl Weierstrass, was a prominent mathematician in ① his own right. He married well, and as a result lived in a grand mansion in Djursholm, Sweden ― just outside of Stockholm. Now Mittag­Leffler was a true celebrity; ② his name was in the newspapers all the time. He dressed like a dandy, and was really a man about town. Nobel was an unattractive, dull, solitary bachelor. He never married, and as far as we know ③ he never had a lady friend in his entire adult life. He was extremely jealous of Mittag­Leffler and the lifestyle that ④ he led. Mittag­Leffler was the most prominent and celebrated scientist in all of Sweden. Some thought it likely that, were there a Nobel Prize in mathematics, ⑤ he would have received it. This may have influenced Alfred Nobel’s decision not to found a
prize in mathematics.

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Businesses of design and entertainment are essentially competing with one another to predict the consumer’s taste ― but also have some ability to 	. In fashion, there is something of a cottage industry to predict which colors will be popular in the next season. This must be done a year or so in advance because of the planning time required to turn around a clothing line. If a group of influential designers decide that brown will be the hot color next year and start manufacturing lots of brown clothes, and they get models to wear brown, and stores begin to display lots of brown in their windows, the public may well begin to comply with the trend. But they’re responding more to the marketing of brown than expressing some deep underlying preference for it. The designer may look like a savant for having “anticipated” the popular color, but if he had picked white or lavender instead, the same process might have unfolded. [3점]
* savant: 석학, 학자
① help consumers create a new trend
② let consumers reveal their uniqueness
③ reflect it in manufacturing their products
④ influence it through clever marketing plans
⑤ analyze it accurately using customer reviews






32. A challenge unique to environmental science lies in
 	. For example, when you go to the grocery store, the bagger may ask, “Paper or plastic?” How can we know for certain which type of bag has the least environmental impact? There are  techniques for determining what harm may come from using the petrochemical benzene to make a plastic bag and from using chlorine to make a paper bag. However, different substances tend to affect the environment differently: benzene may pose more of a risk to people, whereas chlorine may pose a greater risk to organisms in a stream. It is difficult, if not impossible, to decide which is better or worse for the environment overall. There is no single measure of environmental quality. Ultimately, our assessments and our choices involve value judgments and personal opinions. [3점]

① the abundance of misleading data
② the randomness of natural events
③ the dilemmas raised by subjectivity
④ the difficulty in gaining public support
⑤ the risks involved in its research methods




6	영어 영역


33. Risk portfolios explain why people often become original in one part of their lives 	.
T. S. Eliot’s landmark work, The Waste Land, has been
hailed as one of the twentieth century’s most significant poems. But after publishing it in 1922, Eliot kept his London bank job until 1925, rejecting the idea of embracing professional risk. As the novelist Aldous Huxley noted after paying him an office visit, Eliot was “the most bank­clerky of all bank clerks.” When he finally did leave the position, Eliot still didn’t strike out on his own. He spent the next forty years working for a publishing house to provide stability in his life, writing poetry on the side. As Polaroid founder Edwin Land remarked, “No person could possibly be original in one area unless he were possessed of the emotional and social stability that comes from fixed attitudes in all areas other than the one in which he is being original.” [3점]

① so as to gain as much return as possible
② while remaining quite conventional in others
③ at the cost of success in other areas of life
④ despite the loss of their emotional stability
⑤ when faced with a financial hardship





34. In her 1850 preface to Wuthering Heights and Agnes Grey, Charlotte Bront? gives a detailed  account  of  the reasons behind her decision to use a male pseudonym. She writes that adopting a masculinized pseudonym was  an unsophisticated decision based on a ‘vague impression.’ However, Bront?’s anxieties did not stem from the fear that her gender would block her quest for a publisher. Rather, she worried that 	. The Bront? sisters perceived themselves to be rebels, but not because they were breaking into a male­dominated field. On the contrary, they wanted to distance themselves from the large group of women who were then writing domestic fiction: ‘we veiled our own names . . . because ― without at the time suspecting that our mode of writing and thinking was not what is called feminine . . . we noticed how critics sometimes use for their chastisement the weapon of personality, and for their reward, a flattery, which is not true praise.’ [3점]
* pseudonym: 필명 ** chastisement: 신랄한 비난

① her work would be dismissed as typically feminine writing
② her name could be confused with that of a notable author
③ her fake name did not suit the genre she was writing
④ it would distance her from all of her previous works
⑤ she might be blamed for hiding her real name
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Bert Vogelstein’s latest effort is what he calls a “liquid biopsy.” A blood sample is taken and tested for the presence of even the tiniest amounts of tumor DNA.
① A tumor detected by Vogelstein’s liquid biopsy can be detected at just 1 percent the size of what is necessary to be detected by an MRI, currently the most reliable tool for finding cancer. ② MRI scans are capable of producing a variety of chemical and physical data, in addition to detailed spatial images. ③ The amount can be so small that the cancer is discovered even before any symptoms have developed. ④ What this effectively means is that getting a blood test for cancer could become part of everybody’s annual medical checkup if the price goes down far enough, as Vogelstein believes it will. ⑤ The testing done to date by researchers at two dozen medical institutions shows that Vogelstein’s method found 47 percent of earliest­stage cancers.
* biopsy: 생검(생체 조직 검사)




[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) Today, leave kids alone in front of the set with a remote control in their hands, and they’re likely to be exposed to explosions, bloody fights, and some rather provocative views of the human body. So what did parents do? They adapted.

(B) Think back about thirty years, when there were only three or four networks on television. Back then, parents could leave their children in front of the set without having to worry about what they’d see.

(C) They took away the remote. They purchased parental­lock technology. They began to watch with their children. People haven’t turned off their TVs, just as they will not stop reading email. They will continue to develop simple techniques that will enable them to manage ever­increasing volumes of irrelevant email.
* provocative: 도발적인

① (A)  - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A)  - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A)  - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.


(A) But here’s what is: none of the participants actually pressed the button. Stopping the noise didn’t make the difference . . . knowing they could stop the noise did. The button gave  them  a sense of control and allowed them to endure the stress.

(B) If the noise became too unpleasant, they could press a button and make it stop. Sure enough, the button allowed them to stay calmer, make fewer mistakes, and show less irritation. That’s nothing surprising.

(C) They started sweating and their heart rates and blood pressure climbed. They struggled to focus and made mistakes. Many got so frustrated that they gave up. Searching for a way to reduce anxiety, researchers gave some of the participants an escape.

① (A)  - (C) - (B)	② (B)  - (A)  - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C)  - (A)  - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.


　Writing, like so many inventions, came about by accident, and this one happened on the back of an envelope. ( ① ) About 6,000 years ago in Mesopotamia, a group of people known as the Sumerians invented a new way of keeping track of trade. ( ② ) They made clay tokens shaped like animals, jars, and other goods, and recorded deals by wrapping the tokens up in clay envelopes. ( ③ ) Once they’d sealed an envelope, they could no longer see what was inside it. ( ④ ) It didn’t take them long to realize that, once they’d done this, they didn’t need the tokens any more: just the marked envelope would do. ( ⑤ ) So by about 3100 BC, the envelopes had turned into simple squares of clay recording trade deals in symbols.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?




 What was it that prompted scientists to become interested in the way we treat animals? Before the Second World War, agricultural operations in the Western world consisted of traditional family­run farms. ( ① ) These were small scale and were typically dependent on manual labour to work the land and tend the animals. ( ② ) There was a general view within society that the farmers cared for their livestock because they were closely tied to the farmers’ livelihood. ( ③ ) Animals that had previously spent large parts of the year outdoors were now confined to indoor facilities. ( ④ ) By keeping livestock in windowless sheds and using artificial lighting and temperature control, growing seasons could be prolonged and it became possible to produce greater quantities of meat, milk, and eggs. ( ⑤ ) The human contact with individual animals, however, was lost.




?

(A) (B)
① violation	……	cleanliness
② violation	……	hardship
③ dilemma	……	hardship
④ perfection	……	cleanliness
⑤ perfection	……	strength




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 



(C) 
　After an hour or so, the man had calmed down, and started to think (c) he may have been a little hard on his son. Maybe there was something he really needed to buy with that ten dollars, and he really didn’t ask for money often. The man went to the little boy’s room. “Are you asleep, son?” he asked. “No, Daddy, I’m awake,” replied the boy. “I’ve been thinking, maybe I was too hard on you earlier,” said the man. “It’s been a long day and I took my irritation out on (d) you. Here’s that ten dollars you asked for.”
(D) 





41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Clocks: The Best Invention for Modern City Life
② Effects of Perceived Time on Work Performance
③ Tips on Dealing with Big Waves and Crew Fatigue
④ Why Should Sailors Determine Longitude and Latitude?
⑤ A Portable Time Standard: Advance in Marine Navigation
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① sailors’ safety	② accurate timekeeping
③ calculating latitude	④ remote communication
⑤ weather forecasting

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　A man came home from work late again, tired and irritated, to find his five­year­old son waiting for him at the door. “Daddy, may I ask you a question?” “Yeah, sure, what is it?” replied the man. “Daddy, how much money do you make an hour?” “That’s none of your business. What makes (a) you ask such a thing?” the man said angrily. “I just want to know. Please tell me,” pleaded the little boy. “If you must know, I make twenty dollars an hour.” “Oh,” the little boy replied, “Daddy, may I borrow ten dollars, please?”
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D)  - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D)  - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)


44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 남자가 귀가했을 때 아들이 문에서 그를 기다리고 있었다.
② 남자는 아들에게 자신이 한 시간에 20달러를 번다고 말했다.
③ 아들은 베개 아래에서 지폐를 꺼냈다.
④ 아들은 남자에게 자주 돈을 달라고 했었다.
⑤ 남자는 아들이 돈을 얻기 위해 질문을 했다고 생각했다.



2023학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 진로 상담 신청을 독려하려고
② 진로 센터 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 진로 센터 이전에 관해 안내하려고
④ 진로 상담 신청 절차를 설명하려고
⑤ 진로 센터 운영 시간 연장을 공지하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 과대 포장은 밀키트 가격 상승의 주요 원인이다.
② 과대 포장을 하는 밀키트 배달 서비스 이용을 피해야 한다.
③ 환경 보호를 위해 재활용할 수 있는 포장재를 사용해야 한다.
④ 고객 후기가 많은 배달 서비스를 이용하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 음식의 맛과 질을 기준으로 밀키트를 선택해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 주민 - 경비원	② 손님 - 가게 점원
③ 배달 기사 - 식당 주인	④ 야영객 - 캠프장 관리인
⑤ 건축가 - 엘리베이터 설치업자

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 꽃집에 전화하기	② 현수막 설치하기
③ 좌석 배치도 붙이기	④ 마이크 작동 여부 확인하기
⑤ 커버에 장학 증서 끼우기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $35	② $40	③ $45	④ $50	⑤ $55



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 피트니스 센터 회원권을 갱신하지 않는 이유를 고르시오.
① 회원권이 너무 비싸서
② 테니스 수업을 받기로 해서
③ 당분간 운동을 할 수 없어서
④ 개인 지도 프로그램이 없어서
⑤ 시설이 더 좋은 곳으로 옮기고 싶어서

8. 대화를 듣고, Camellia Vegan Table에 관해 언급되지 않은 것 을 고르시오.
① 위치	② 개점 시간	③ 메뉴
④ 음식 가격	⑤ 휴점일

9. Spring Stewardship Day에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 올해는 4월 29일에 개최될 것이다.
② 참가자들은 쓰레기 줍기, 나무 보호 등을 도울 것이다.
③ 봉사 활동이 끝난 후 점심이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
④ 작업용 장갑을 포함하여 모든 도구와 장비가 제공될 것이다.
⑤ 참가비는 무료이지만 사전 등록이 필요하다.

10.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 무선 방수 스피 커를 고르시오.
Wireless Waterproof Speakers


①
②
③
④
⑤

1.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s nice of you to help me read the lyrics of the songs.
② It took me so long to get to the language school.
③ I sing K­pop songs to master Korean.
④ I don’t go to the Korean language school anymore.
⑤ I was able to read Korean lyrics in about three months.

12.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I know, but I already rented a car.
② Good idea. Let’s not rent a car this time.
③ Don’t worry. The next bus is coming soon.
④ I’m sorry. I forgot to rent a car for our trip.
⑤ You’re right. It’ll be exciting to drive a luxury car.




2	영어 영역



13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① No way. I’m still printing the banner.
② Yes, I’ll let you know the new date soon.
③ But I’ve already sent them to your school.
④ No problem. I’ll change the date on the banner.
⑤ Okay. I’ll put them in when packaging the banner.



14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I agree. Outdoor gardening is very good for health.
② Sounds great. I’ll help the beginners with gardening.
③ Yeah. I already made a couple of terrarium gardens.
④ Thanks. Last weekend’s terrarium workshop was helpful.
⑤ Sure. It’ll be fun to create my own garden in a glass jar.



15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Kate가 Ben에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Kate:  	
① There’re many things to consider when adopting a cat.
② Let’s get advice from Sarah on how to start our club.
③ We should check with her if there’s an animal club.
④ Why don’t we join the school drama club instead?
⑤ How about helping Sarah organize a drama club?



[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① surprising and unusual laws around the world
② the most visited tourist attractions in the world
③ universal laws and principles governing your life
④ necessity of improving laws on cultural diversity
⑤ what to consider when choosing a family tour program



17.언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① Italy	② Germany	③ France
④ Greece	⑤ Spain





18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 잡지사에 기사 기고를 하겠다고 제안하려고
② 기사 지면을 늘려줄 것을 요청하려고
③ 새로 나온 유기농 제품을 소개하려고
④ 기사에 대한 피드백에 감사하려고
⑤ 창업에 관한 조언을 구하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 Mark의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Mark was participating in freestyle swimming competitions in this Olympics. He had a firm belief that he could get a medal in the 200m. Swimming was dominated by Americans at the time, so Mark was dreaming of becoming a national hero for his country, Britain. That day, Mark was competing in his very last race ? the final round of the 200m. He had done his training and was ready. One minute and fifty seconds later, it was all over. He had tried hard and, at his best, was ranked number four. He fell short of a bronze medal by 0.49 of a second. And that was the end of Mark’s swimming career. He was heartbroken. He had nothing left.
① worried → hopeful	② grateful → fearful
③ pleased → jealous	④ indifferent → upset
⑤ confident → disappointed

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There is no denying that engaging in argument carries certain significant risks. When we argue, we exchange and examine reasons with a view toward believing what our best reasons say we should believe; sometimes we discover that our current reasons fall short, and that our beliefs are not well supported after all. Or sometimes we discover that a belief that we had dismissed as silly or obviously false in fact enjoys the support of highly compelling reasons. On other occasions, we discover that the reasons offered by those with whom we disagree measure up toe­to­toe with our own reasons. In any of these situations, an adjustment in our belief is called for; we must change what we believe, or revise it, or replace it, or suspend belief altogether.
① 논쟁 중에 알게 된 바에 따라 자신의 믿음을 조정해야 한다.
② 논쟁을 하기 전에 상대방의 주장을 면밀히 검토해야 한다.
③ 논쟁에서 불리해지더라도 감정적으로 반응해서는 안 된다.
④ 의사 결정 시에는 충분한 시간을 갖고 신중하게 해야 한다.
⑤ 반대 의견을 제시할 때 상대의 논리적 허점을 공략해야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21.밑줄  친  live in the shadow of the future가  다음  글에서  의 미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Thanks to the power of reputation, we help others without expecting an immediate return. If, thanks to endless chat and intrigue, the world knows that you are a good, charitable guy, then you boost your chance of being helped by someone else at some future date. The converse is also the case. I am less likely to get my back scratched, in the form of a favor, if it becomes known that I never scratch anybody else’s. Indirect reciprocity now means something like “If I scratch your back, my good example will encourage others to do the same and, with luck, someone will scratch mine.” By the same token, our behavior is endlessly shaped by the possibility that somebody else might be watching us or might find out what we have done. We are often troubled by the thought of what others may think of our deeds. In this way, our actions have consequences that go far beyond any individual act of charity, or indeed any act of mean­spirited malice. We all behave differently when we know we live in the shadow of the future. That shadow is cast by our actions because there is always the possibility that others will find out what we have done.

23.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Whenever possible, we should take measures to re­socialize           the information we think about. The continual patter we carry on in our heads is in fact a kind of internalized conversation. Likewise, many of the written forms we encounter at school and at work ? from exams and evaluations, to profiles and case studies, to essays and proposals ? are really social exchanges (questions, stories, arguments) put on paper and addressed to some imagined listener or interlocutor. There are significant advantages to turning such interactions at a remove back into actual social encounters. Research demonstrates that the brain processes the “same” information differently, and often more effectively, when other human beings are involved ? whether we’re imitating them, debating them, exchanging stories with them, synchronizing and cooperating with them, teaching or being taught by them. We are inherently social creatures, and our thinking benefits from bringing other people into our train of thought.
* patter: 재잘거림 ** interlocutor: 대화자
*** at a remove: 조금 거리를 둔


① are distracted by inner conflict
② fall short of our own expectations
③ seriously compete regardless of the results
④ are under the influence of uncertainty
⑤ ultimately reap what we have sown

* malice: 악의

① importance of processing information via social interactions
② ways of improving social skills through physical activities
③ necessity of regular evaluations of cognitive functions
④ influence of personality traits on social interactions
⑤ socialization as a form of internalized social control



2.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When you experience affect without knowing the cause, you are more likely to treat affect as information about the world, rather than your experience of the world. The psychologist Gerald L. Clore has spent decades performing clever experiments to better understand how people make decisions every day based on gut feelings. This phenomenon is  called  affective   realism,    because  we  experience  supposed facts about the world that are created in part by our feelings. For example, people report more happiness and life satisfaction on sunny days, but only when they are not explicitly asked about the weather. When you apply for a job or college or medical school, make sure you interview on a sunny day, because interviewers tend to rate applicants more negatively when it is rainy. And the next time a good friend snaps at you, remember affective realism. Maybe your friend is irritated with you, but perhaps she didn’t sleep well last night, or maybe it’s just lunchtime. The change in her body budget, which she’s experiencing as affect, might not have anything to do with you.
① 직감에 따른 판단이 더 좋은 결과로 이어지는 경우가 많다.
② 외부적 환경이 우리의 감정과 판단에 미치는 영향은 크지 않다.
③ 우리는 자신도 모르게 감정의 영향을 받아서 현실을 판단한다.
④ 상대방의 반응이 평소와 다를 때에는 자신을 되돌아봐야 한다.
⑤ 상대방에 관한 배경지식을 통해 그 사람을 더 잘 이해하게 된다.


24.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Every day an enormous amount of energy is created by the movement of people and animals, and by interactions of people with their immediate surroundings. This is usually in very small amounts or in very dispersed environments. Virtually all of that energy is lost to the local environment, and historically there have been no efforts to gather it. It may seem odd to consider finding ways to “collect” energy that is given off all around us ? by people simply walking or by walking upstairs and downstairs or by riding stationary/exercise bicycles, for example ? but that is the general idea and nature of energy harvesting. The broad idea of energy harvesting is that there are many places at which small amounts of energy are generated ? and often wasted ? and when collected, this can be put to some practical use. Current efforts have begun, aimed at collecting such energy in smaller devices which can store it, such as portable batteries.
① Energy Harvesting: Every Little Helps
② Burning Waste for Energy Is Harmful
③ Is Renewable Energy Really Green?
④ Pros and Cons of Energy Harvesting
⑤ Can Natural Energy Sources Fulfill the Demand?




4	영어 영역



25.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27.Project  Pipeline  Virtual  Camp에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?




















　The above graph shows the US adults’ attitudes to media ads, based on a survey in 2022. ① In all the mediums surveyed, the percentages of respondents who enjoy or love media ads are higher than those of respondents who don’t enjoy or hate media ads. ② As for those who are indifferent to media ads, their percentages are the lowest in every medium except for print mediums. ③ For respondents who don’t enjoy or hate media ads, their percentage in social media platforms is the highest, while that in websites the lowest. ④ The percentage of respondents who are indifferent to media ads in websites is the same as that of those who have the same attitude to media ads in social media platforms. ⑤ In print mediums, the percentage of respondents who are indifferent to media ads is more than twice that of those who don’t enjoy or hate media ads.



26.Georgy Gause에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Georgy Gause was born in Moscow, Russia. He was admitted to Moscow State University, where he received his undergraduate degree in 1931 and PhD in 1940. Prior to achieving his doctoral degree, Gause published his ecological classic,   The      Struggle              for       Existence,             in   1934    (and    in English!). This book and similar research papers in the 1930s helped lay the early foundation for population ecology and indeed fostered the introduction of mathematics into the historical development of ecology. In ecology, Gause’s contributions are equally acknowledged along with those of other early ecologists who studied population dynamics. However, most ecologists are not aware that Gause eventually went on to conduct very important research on antibiotics and somewhat left ecology behind. From 1960 until his death he was director of the institute of antibiotics he and his wife had founded.
① 1931년에 학사 학위를 받았다.
② 박사 학위 취득 전에 TheStruggle for Existence를 출간했다.
③ 그의 책은 생태학의 역사적 발전에 수학의 도입을 촉진했다.
④ 그의 항생제 연구는 대부분의 생태학자에게 알려져 있다.
⑤ 아내와 항생제 연구소를 설립했다.






① 참가 연령은 11세에서 15세이다.
② 사흘간 오전 10시부터 오후 1시까지 진행된다.
③ 웹 사이트에서 등록해야 한다.
④ 참가자는 미술용품 세트를 구입해야 한다.
⑤ 드로잉과 모형 제작을 온라인에서 가르칠 것이다.


28.2023 Oyster Bay Town Toddler Sports Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 7주간 진행되는 프로그램이다.
② 참가 아동마다 매주 두 개의 수업을 선택해야 한다.
③ 수업은 수요일과 금요일 오후에 있다.
④ 등록은 3월 24일 오전 9시에 시작될 것이다.
⑤ 지역 거주 아동의 참가비는 90달러이다.




영어 영역	5

29.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　From the 8th to the 12th century CE, while Europe suffered the perhaps overdramatically named Dark Ages, science on planet Earth could be found almost ① exclusively in the Islamic world. This science was not exactly like our science today, but it was surely antecedent to ② it and was nonetheless an activity aimed at knowing about the world. Muslim rulers granted scientific institutions tremendous resources, such as libraries, observatories, and hospitals. Great schools in all the cities ③ covering the Arabic Near East and Northern Africa (and even into Spain) trained generations of scholars. Almost every word in the modern scientific lexicon that begins with the prefix “al” ④ owes its origins to Islamic science ? algorithm, alchemy, alcohol, alkali, algebra. And then, just over 400 years after it started, it ground to an apparent halt, and it would be a few hundred years, give or take, before ⑤ that we would today unmistakably recognize as science appeared in Europe ? with Galileo, Kepler, and, a bit later, Newton.
* antecedent: 선행하는 ** lexicon: 어휘 (목록)
*** give or take: 대략












30.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　In centuries past, we might learn much about life from the wisdom of our elders. Today, the majority of the messages we receive about how to live a good life come not from Granny’s long ① experience of the world, but from advertising executives hoping to sell us products. If we are satisfied with our lives, we will not feel a burning desire to purchase anything, and then the economy may collapse. But if we are unsatisfied, and any of the products we buy actually delivers the promised lasting fulfillment, subsequent sales figures may likewise ② rise. We exist in a fog of messaging designed explicitly to influence our behavior. Not surprisingly, our behavior often shifts in precisely the

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The quest for knowledge in the material world is a never­ending pursuit, but the quest does not mean that a thoroughly schooled person is an educated person or that an educated person is a wise person. We are too often blinded by our ignorance of our ignorance, and our pursuit of knowledge is no guarantee of wisdom. Hence, we are prone to becoming the blind leading the blind because our overemphasis on competition in nearly everything makes looking good more important than being good. The resultant fear of being thought a fool and criticized therefore is one of greatest enemies of true learning. Although our ignorance is
undeniably vast, it is from the vastness of this selfsame
ignorance that our sense of wonder grows. But, when we do not know we are ignorant, we do not know enough to even question, let alone investigate, our ignorance. No one can teach another person anything. All one can do with and for someone else is to facilitate learning by helping the person to 	.
* prone to: ∼하기 쉬운 ** selfsame: 똑같은
① find their role in teamwork
② learn from others’ successes and failures
③ make the most of technology for learning
④ obtain knowledge from wonderful experts
⑤ discover the wonder of their ignorance


32. Lewis­Williams believes that the religious view of hunter groups was a contract between the hunter and the hunted. ‘The powers of the underworld allowed people to kill animals, provided people responded in certain ritual ways, such as taking fragments of animals into the caves and inserting them into the “membrane”.’ This is borne out in the San. Like other shamanistic societies, they have admiring practices between human hunters and their prey, suffused with taboos derived from extensive natural knowledge. These practices suggest that honouring may be one method of softening the disquiet of killing. It should be said that this disquiet needn’t arise because there is something fundamentally wrong with a human killing another animal, but simply because we are aware of doing the killing. And perhaps, too, because in some sense we ‘know’ what we are killing. We make sound guesses that the pain and desire for life we feel ? our worlds of experience ? have a counterpart in the animal we kill. As predators, this can create problems
for  us.  One  way  to  smooth  those  edges,  then,  is   to

manner ③ intended. If you can be made to feel sufficiently	 	. inferior due to your yellowed teeth, perhaps you will rush to

the pharmacy to purchase whitening strips. The ④ lack of any research whatsoever correlating tooth shade with life satisfaction is never mentioned. Having been told one hundred times a day how to be happy, we spend much of our lives buying the necessary accoutrements and feeling ⑤ disappointed not to discover life satisfaction inside the packaging.
* accoutrements: (필요) 용품

* membrane: 지하 세계로 통하는 바위 표면
** suffused with: ～로 가득 찬
① view that prey with respect
② domesticate those animals
③ develop tools for hunting
④ avoid supernatural beliefs
⑤ worship our ancestors’ spirits




6	영어 영역



3.The empiricist philosopher John Locke argued that when the human being was first born, the mind was simply a blank slate ? a tabula rasa? waiting to be  written  on  by experience. Locke believed that our experience shapes who we are and who we become ? and therefore he also believed that, given different experiences, human beings would have different characters. The influence of these ideas was profound, particularly for the new colonies in America, for example, because these were conscious attempts to make a new start and to form a new society. The new society was to  operate  on  a  different  basis  from  that  of European
culture, which was based on the feudal system in which people’s place in society was almost entirely determined by birth, and which therefore tended to emphasize innate characteristics. Locke’s emphasis on the importance of experience    in   forming    the    human    being provided
 	. [3점]
* empiricist: 경험주의자 ** slate: 석판 *** feudal: 봉건 제도의
① foundations for reinforcing ties between European and colonial societies
② new opportunities for European societies to value their tradition
③ an  optimistic framework for	those	trying to form a different society
④ an example of the role that nature plays in building character
⑤ an access to expertise in the areas of philosophy and science

34. In   A  Theory            of    Adaptation,             Linda   Hutcheon   argues   that “An adaptation is not vampiric: it does not draw the life­blood from its source and leave it dying or dead, nor is it paler than the adapted work. It may, on the contrary, keep that prior work alive, giving it an afterlife it would never have had otherwise.” Hutcheon’s refusal to see adaptation as “vampiric” is particularly inspiring for those of us who do work on adaptations. The idea of an “afterlife” of texts, of seeing what comes before as an inspiration for what comes
now, is, by its very definition, keeping works “alive.” Adaptations for young adults, in particular, have the added benefit of engaging the young adult reader with both then and now, past and present ? functioning as both “monuments” to history and the “flesh” of the reader’s lived experience. While this is true for adaptations in general, it is especially important for those written with young adults in mind. Such adaptations	that
might otherwise come across as old­fashioned or irrelevant.
[3점]
① allow young readers to make personal connections with texts
② are nothing more than the combination of different styles
③ break familiar patterns of the ancient heroic stories
④ give a new spotlight to various literary theories
⑤ encourage young writers to make plots original

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　According to the principle of social proof, one way individuals determine appropriate behavior for themselves in a situation is to examine the behavior of others there ? especially similar others. ① It is through social comparison with these referent others that people validate the correctness of their opinions and decisions. ② Consequently, people tend to behave as their friends and peers have behaved. ③ Because the critical source of information within the principle of social proof is the responses of referent others, compliance tactics that employ this information should be especially effective in collectivistically oriented nations and persons. ④ That is, where the individualized self is both the focus and the standard, one’s own behavioral history should be heavily weighted in subsequent behavior. ⑤ Some evidence in this regard comes from a study showing that advertisements that promoted group benefits were more persuasive in Korea (a collectivistic society) than in the United States (an individualistic society).
* tactic: 전술


[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) It depends only on knowledge of human nature and other worldly and social realities. For him it is the study of human nature and worldly existence that will disclose the  relevant  meaning  of  the  notion  of eudaimoni?.
(B) Some people say it is worldly enjoyment while others say it is eternal salvation. Aristotle’s theory will turn out to be “naturalistic” in that it does not depend on any theological or metaphysical knowledge. It does not depend on knowledge of God or of metaphysical and universal moral norms.
(C) Whereas he had argued in a purely formal way that the Good was that to which we all aim, he now gives a more substantive answer: that this universal human goal is happiness. However, he is quick to point out that this conclusion is still somewhat formal since different people have different views about what happiness is.
* salvation: 구원 ** theological: 신학의
*** substantive: 실질적인
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) People were willing to pay almost as much to avoid a 1 percent probability of receiving a shock as they were to pay to avoid a 99 percent probability of receiving a shock. Clearly the affective reaction to the thought of receiving a shock was overwhelming the subjects’ ability to evaluate the probabilities associated.
(B) This is often a very rational attribute to substitute ? affect does convey useful signals as to the costs and benefits of outcomes. A problem sometimes arises, however, when affective valuation is not supplemented by any analytic processing and adjustment at all.
(C) For example, sole reliance on affective valuation can make people insensitive to probabilities and to quantitative features of the outcome that should effect decisions. One study demonstrated that people’s evaluation of a situation where they might receive a shock is insensitive to the probability of receiving the shock because their thinking is swamped by affective evaluation of the situation. [3점]
* swamp: 압도하다
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Going beyond very simple algorithms, some AI­based tools hold out the promise of supporting better causal and probabilistic reasoning in complex domains. ( ① ) Humans have a natural ability to build causal models of the world ? that is, to explain why things happen ? that AI systems still largely lack. ( ② ) For example, while a doctor can explain to a patient why a treatment works, referring to the changes it causes in the body, a modern machine­learning system could only tell you that patients who are given this treatment tend, on average, to get better. ( ③ ) In these cases, supporting human reasoning with more structured AI­based tools may be helpful. ( ④ ) Researchers have been exploring the use of Bayesian Networks ? an AI technology that can be used to map out the causal relationships between events, and to represent degrees of uncertainty around different areas ? for decision support, such as to enable more accurate risk assessment. ( ⑤ ) These may be particularly useful for assessing the threat of novel or rare threats, where little historical data is available, such as the risk of terrorist attacks and new ecological disasters. [3점]
* notoriously: 악명 높게도


40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The linguistic resources we choose to use do not come to us as empty forms ready to be filled with our personal intentions; rather, they come to us with meanings already embedded within them. ( ① ) These meanings, however, are not derived from some universal, logical set of principles; rather, as with their shapes, they are built up over time from their past uses in particular contexts by particular groups of participants in the accomplishment of particular goals that, in turn, are shaped by myriad cultural, historical and institutional forces. ( ② ) The linguistic resources we choose to use at particular communicative moments come to these moments with their conventionalized histories of meaning. ( ③ ) It is their conventionality that binds us to some degree to particular ways of realizing our collective history. ( ④ ) Thus, in our individual uses of our linguistic resources we accomplish two actions simultaneously. ( ⑤ ) We create their typical ? historical ? contexts of use and at the same time we position ourselves in relation to these contexts.
* myriad: 무수히 많은








?
The social conditions in large, industrial cities made urban societies (A) the  informal  controls of the village or small town, introducing (B) measures to effectively induce coordinated urban behaviors.

(A) (B)
① limit	······	permissive
② maintain	······	restrictive
③ evaluate	······	indirect
④ remove	······	restrictive
⑤ reinforce	······	permissive




8	영어 영역



[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 

　Nick was very miserable, for he had never before been deprived of his liberty. He dashed backward and forward in his prison­house, but he could not escape. (b) He thought of his own pleasant home, his companions, the sunlight, the trees, and the flowers. He screamed and tried to get out between the iron bars, but he only tore himself, and all in vain. In a moment, the giant came again to the prison.


(C) 
(D) 





41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Quest for Novelty: Our Survival Instinct
② Gossip as a Source of Social Information
③ The Bias Behind Stereotypical Assumptions
④ The More Information, The More Confusion
⑤ Creativity: Free from the Prison of Our Assumptions

42.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)


4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Nick은 개울에서 물을 마시려고 몸을 숙였다.
② Nick은 감옥에서 도망치려 했으나 성공하지 못했다.
③ 거인의 집에는 나무와 꽃이 없었다.
④ Nick은 감옥에서 자신의 집에서처럼 노래를 불렀다.
⑤ 화가 난 거인은 Nick을 감옥에서 꺼냈다.







2020학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의  내용과 일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. The field trip was very exciting.
② Really? I’ll go there tomorrow then.
③ Certainly. We’re very close friends.
④ Sorry. I was so busy last week.
⑤ Great! It’s going to be sunny.





2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll fix the fire alarm then.
② Thank you. That would be really helpful.
③ Never mind. I had breakfast this morning.
④ Don’t worry. Let’s start exercising tomorrow.
⑤ I disagree. You can go to the train station by bus.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 졸업식 식순을 알려주려고
② 졸업 작품 전시회를 홍보하려고
③ 사진 강좌 수강생을 모집하려고
④ 학교 도서관 이용 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 졸업 사진 촬영 장소 변경을 공지하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 직접 만든 생일 선물이 감동을 준다.
② 생일 파티는 간소하게 하는 것이 바람직하다.
③ 친구에게 주는 생일 선물로는 책이 유용하다.
④ 받고 싶은 생일 선물의 목록을 만드는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 생일 축하는 생일 전에 미리 하는 것이 의미가 있다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 의사 － 환자 보호자	② 담임교사 － 학부모
③ 보험사 직원 － 고객	④ 축구 감독 － 신문 기자
⑤ 물리치료사 － 육상 선수
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 블로그에 여행 계획 올리기	② 방수 재킷 구입하기
③ 샌드위치 만들기	④ 낚싯대 장만하기
⑤ 예약 확인하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 영화를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 도서관에서 일을 해야 해서
② 역사 시험 준비를 해야 해서
③ 친구 생일 파티에 가야 해서
④ 야구 경기를 보러 가야 해서
⑤ 로봇 쇼에 참가해야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $12	② $19	③ $21	④ $22	⑤ $24


10. 대화를  듣고, 남자의  결혼식에  관해  언급되지  않은  것을 고르시오.
① 날짜	② 장소	③ 식사 메뉴
④ 초대 인원	⑤ 특별 이벤트


11. The International Air Show에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10개국이 참가할 것이다.
② 비행 공연 전에 사인 행사가 있을 것이다.
③ 방문객은 전시된 비행기 안에 들어갈 수 있다.
④ 8세 이하 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.
⑤ 무료 셔틀버스를 운행할 것이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 스피커를 고르시오.
Portable Speakers

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Don’t worry. I know that you’re very busy.
② That makes sense. I’ll focus on practicing the flute.
③ Definitely. I can help you become a great journalist.
④ That’s too bad. I’m sure you’ll get elected next time.
⑤ You’re right. I think I should leave the school orchestra.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① No problem. I’ll inform my students about the quiz.
② Yes. I can’t wait to go to Thailand for my vacation.
③ Sure. I’ll try to find my pictures of Thai holidays.
④ Of course. I’m sure you’re a very good cook.
⑤ Yeah. I bought an airline ticket for you.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Green이 Steven에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ms. Green:   	
① You’d better remove your personal information from the website.
② You should make sure the information you find online is correct.
③ I think it’s important to meet the deadline of the presentation.
④ I’m worried that our presentation topic is inappropriate.
⑤ I’ll explain how to connect to the Internet in the office.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① foods that fight against colds
② preparing delicious cold foods
③ effective foods for losing weight
④ growing organic vegetables at home
⑤ bacteria that help the immune system

17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① ginger	② mushrooms	③ spinach
④ yogurt	⑤ garlic


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear New Members,
　Welcome to Rock Climbing Club and hope you will get the most out of this rewarding sport. As beginners,  you may be nervous in anticipation of your first climb. Many of you have asked about what climbing equipment to  buy, such as boots, ropes, helmets, and gloves. You don’t have  to bother yourself with these concerns. We offer a special service that will rent you all the equipment you will ever need for climbing. The rental service is always available  for our members. Just come on Saturday, ask for the rental service, and be ready to have a fun climb. I look forward to seeing you all this Saturday at 9 a.m.
Sincerely,
John B. Snyder

① 일시적으로 통제되는 등반 구간을 공지하려고
② 암벽 등반의 긍정적인 효과에 대해 설명하려고
③ 암벽 등반을 위한 장비 대여에 대해 알려주려고
④ 암벽 등반 클럽의 회비 납부 방법을 통보하려고
⑤ 암벽 등반에 필요한 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Rachel의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Rachel loved watching birds in the woods. However, she was confined to the house because of a broken leg. She turned on
the TV but nothing was interesting. She tried to read a book but it was not fun at all. All she could do was sit, look at her broken leg, and watch the clock. As she was listening to the dull tick-tock of the clock, her phone vibrated. It was a message with an audio file from her dad. As she opened it, a huge smile spread across her face. Her dad had sent a recording of a little wren’s song ― her favorite bird song. Listening to the bright warm sounds lifted her spirits and made her day more pleasant.
* wren: 굴뚝새
① bored     → delighted	② confident    → nervous
③ pleased  → upset	④ frightened  → relieved
⑤ calm → annoyed

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Unless your company offers a class on how to give and receive feedback, don’t assume those around you, including your boss, know how to give negative feedback. They may be too aggressive. Too direct. Maybe even a little mean. Perhaps they are bad at giving feedback because no one ever taught them how. Or perhaps they’ve had bosses who were bad at giving them feedback. Try to brush aside the stuff that offends or upsets you to really try to hear what they are saying you can do better next time. And if they only tell you things  like, “don’t let that happen again,” then work to figure  out what  you can do better next time, so that it doesn’t actually happen again. Preparing to solve a problem for next time feels better than getting upset about our failure to solve it this time.
① 직장 상사와 동료에게 부정적인 피드백을 삼가야 한다.
② 실수를 반복하지 않으려면 모든 피드백을 수용해야 한다.
③ 효과적인 피드백 전달 방식에 관한 직원 교육이 필요하다.
④ 업무의 효율성을 높이려면 피드백을 신속하게 주고받아야 한다.
⑤ 부정적인 피드백에 불쾌해하지 말고 문제 해결에 향후 힘써야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 a cage model이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　For a long time, tourism was seen as a huge monster invading the areas of indigenous peoples, introducing them to the evils of the modern world. However, research has shown that this is not the correct way to perceive it. In most places, tourists are welcome and indigenous people see tourism as a path to modernity and economic development. But such development is always a two-edged sword. Tourism can mean progress, but most often also means the loss of traditions and cultural uniqueness. And, of course, there are examples of ‘cultural pollution’, ‘vulgarization’ and ‘phony-folk-cultures’. The background for such characteristics is often more or less romantic and the normative ideas of a former or prevailing authenticity. Ideally (to some) there should exist ancient cultures for modern consumers to gaze at, or even step into for a while, while travelling or on holiday. This is a cage model that is difficult to defend in a global world where we all, indigenous or not, are part of the same social fabric.
* indigenous: 토착의 ** vulgarization: 상스럽게 함
① preserving a past culture in its original form for consumption
② restoring local cultural heritages that have long been neglected
③ limiting public access to prehistoric sites for conservation
④ confining tourism research to authentic cultural traditions
⑤ maintaining a budget for cultural policies and regulations


22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　While genetic advancements are often reported as environmentally dependent or modest in effect size in academic publications, these are often translated to the public in deterministic language through the media. Sociologists of genetics argue that media portrayals of genetic influences on health have increased considerably over time, becoming part  of the public discourse through which individuals understand symptoms, make help-seeking decisions, and form views of people with particular traits or conditions. The media is the primary source of information about genetic advances and  their applications, but it does not provide a neutral discourse. Rather, information is selectively included or ignored, and scientific and clinical implications of genetic discoveries are often inaccurate or overstated. This “genetic optimism” has influenced public opinion, and research suggests that ordinary people are largely accepting of genetic explanations for health and behavior and tend to overestimate the heritability of common diseases for biological relatives.
① 유전학자들의 편견과 낙관주의는 유전학의 발전을 저해한다.
② 성격이 낙천적인 사람들은 유전의 영향을 덜 받는 경향이 있다.
③ 대중 매체는 건강에 관한 유전학의 성과를 부정확하게 전달한다.
④ 유전학은 대중 매체를 통해 이해할 수 있는 학문이 아니다.
⑤ 유전학의 발전으로 건강에 관한 지식이 대중화되었다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Libraries are becoming increasingly interested in the  services they are providing for their users. This is an important focus ― especially as more and more information becomes available electronically. However, the traditional strengths of libraries have always been their collections. This is true still today ― especially in research libraries. Also, collection makeup is the hardest thing to change quickly. For example, if a library has a long tradition of heavily collecting materials published in Mexico, then even if that library stops purchasing all Mexican imprints, its Mexican collection will still be large and impressive for several years to come unless they start withdrawing books. Likewise, if a library has not collected much in a subject, and then decides to start collecting heavily in that area it will take several years for the collection to be large enough and rich enough to be considered an important research tool.
① lasting significance of library collections even in the digital age
② changing roles of local libraries and their effects on society
③ growing needs for analyzing a large volume of library data
④ online services as a key to the success of research libraries
⑤ rare book collectors’ contributions to a library’s reputation







24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　From the late nineteenth century on, the dullness found in the senile, their isolation and withdrawal, their clinging to the past and lack of interest in worldly affairs were characteristically represented as the symptoms of senility ― the social shame of the inevitable deterioration of the brain. Following World War II, academic discourse on aging typically represented these as the causes of senility. The location of senile mental  deterioration was no longer the aging brain but a society that, through involuntary retirement, social isolation, and the loosening of traditional family ties, stripped the elderly of the roles that had sustained meaning in their lives. When elderly people were deprived of these meaningful social roles, when they became increasingly isolated and were cut off from the interests and activities that had earlier occupied them, not surprisingly their mental functioning deteriorated. The elderly did not so much lose their minds as lose their place.
* senile: 노쇠한 ** deterioration: 노화
① Aged Mind in Concert with Aged Body: An Unfailing Truth
② No Change from Past to Present: Social Images of Old Age
③ No Country for Old Men: Age Discrimination Intensified
④ What Makes the Elderly Decline: Being Left Out Socially
⑤ Not Disabled But Differently Abled: New Faces of Old Age


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Glend High School’s Family Dinner & Dance에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

















　The three pie charts above show the percentages  of American adults’ responses to a survey conducted in  2017. The survey asked whether people should be allowed to fly drones at three locations: public parks, beaches, and near people’s homes. ① While 44% of the respondents said people should be allowed to fly drones in public parks, 25% said people should not be allowed to do so. ② When asked if people should be allowed to fly drones on beaches, 35% of the respondents said it should be allowed and 32% said it should not. ③ More than half of the respondents said people should not be allowed to fly drones near  people’s  homes. ④ Less than 10% of the respondents said people should be allowed to fly drones near people’s homes. ⑤ For each of the three locations, the proportion of the respondents who chose “It depends” is above 30%.






26. Carl Stokes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Born in 1927 in Cleveland, Ohio, Carl Stokes had a hard time early in his life. When he was a young child, his father died. As he grew up, he held many odd jobs to help his family.
Stokes graduated from Cleveland-Marshall College of  Law and passed the bar exam. He established a law firm in 1962. A few years later, he ran for Mayor of Cleveland and lost, but he entered the race again in the next election and won.  He  became the first African-American mayor of the city. After retiring from politics, he moved to New York City and became a TV news anchor. Later in his life, he was appointed the U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Seychelles. His amazing life finally came to an end in his birth city in 1996.
① 어린아이였을 때 아버지가 돌아가셨다.
② 1962년에 법률 회사를 설립했다.
③ 재출마한 Cleveland  시장 선거에서 패배했다.
④ 정계 은퇴 후 TV  뉴스 앵커가 되었다.
⑤ Seychelles 공화국에 미국 대사로 임명되었다.









① 9월 7일에 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
② 학생은 자기 가족을 네 명까지 초대할 수 있다.
③ 입장권은 학생회 사무실에서 사전에 구매해야 한다.
④ 참가자의 옷차림에 제약이 없다.
⑤ 가족사진을 찍어 줄 사진사가 현장에 있을 것이다.


28. 2019 Astronomy & Night Sky Observations에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 밤하늘 관찰 후 특강이 있을 것이다.
② 강의실 좌석은 30개로 한정되어 있다.
③ 밤하늘 관찰은 주차장에서 한다.
④ 12세 이하 어린이의 프로그램 참가비는 반값이다.
⑤ 겨울옷은 가져올 필요가 없다.


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　To begin with a psychological reason, the knowledge of another’s personal affairs can tempt the possessor of this information ① to repeat it as gossip because as unrevealed information it remains socially inactive. Only when the information is repeated can its possessor ② turn the fact that he knows something into something socially valuable like social recognition, prestige, and notoriety. As long as he keeps his information to ③ himself, he may feel superior to those who do not know it. But knowing and not telling does not   give him that feeling of “superiority that, so to say, latently contained in the secret, fully ④ actualizing itself only at the moment of disclosure.” This is the main motive for gossiping about well-known figures and superiors. The gossip producer assumes that some of the “fame” of the subject of gossip, as
⑤ whose “friend” he presents himself, will rub off on him.
* prestige: 명성 ** notoriety: 악명 *** latently: 잠재적으로










30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　One misconception that often appears in the writings of physical scientists who are looking at biology from the outside is that the environment appears to them to be a static entity, which cannot contribute new bits of information as evolution progresses. This, however, is by no means the case. Far from being static, the environment is constantly changing and offering new ① challenges to evolving populations. For higher organisms, the most significant changes in  the  environment are those produced by the contemporaneous evolution of other organisms. The evolution of a horse’s hoof from a five-toed foot has ② enabled the horse to gallop rapidly over open plains. But such galloping is of no ③ advantage to a horse unless it is being chased by a predator. The horse’s efficient mechanism for running would never have evolved except for the fact that meat-eating predators were at the same time evolving more efficient methods of ④ attack. Consequently, laws based upon ecological relationships among different  kinds of organisms are ⑤ optional for understanding evolution and the diversity of life to which it has given rise.
* hoof: 발굽 ** gallop: 질주하다 *** predator: 포식자

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When you begin to tell a story again that you have retold many times, what you retrieve from memory is the  index to  the story itself. That index can be embellished in a variety of ways. Over time, even the embellishments become standardized. An old man’s story that he has told hundreds of times shows little variation, and any variation that does exist becomes part of the story itself, regardless of its origin. People add details to their stories that may or may not have occurred. They are recalling indexes and reconstructing details. If at some point they add a nice detail, not really certain of its validity, telling the story with that same detail a few more times will ensure its permanent place in the story index. In other words, the stories we  tell  time  and again are 	to the memory we have of the events that the story relates.
* retrieve: 회수하다 ** embellish: 윤색하다
① identical	② beneficial	③ alien
④ prior	⑤ neutral











32. With population growth slowing, the strongest force increasing demand for more agricultural production will be rising incomes, which are desired by practically all governments and individuals. Although richer people spend smaller proportions of their income on food, in total they consume more food ― and richer food, which contributes to various kinds of disease and debilitation.  The  changes  in diet that usually accompany higher incomes will require relatively greater increases in the production of feed grains, rather than food grains, as foods of animal origin partly
 	. It takes two to six times more grain to produce food value through animals than to get the equivalent value directly from plants. It is thus quite credible to estimate that in order to meet economic and social needs within the next three to five decades, the world should be producing more than twice as much grain and agricultural products as at present, but in ways that these are accessible to the food-insecure.
* debilitation: 건강 악화
① displace plant-based foods in people’s diets
② demand eco-friendly processing systems
③ cause several nutritional imbalances
④ indicate the consumers’ higher social status
⑤ play an important role in population growth


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. If one looks at the Oxford definition, one gets the sense that post-truth is not so much a claim that truth does not exist as  that facts are subordinate to our political point of view. The Oxford definition focuses on “what” post-truth is: the idea that feelings sometimes matter more than facts. But just as important is the next question, which is why this ever occurs. Someone does not argue against an obvious or easily confirmable fact for no reason; he or she does so when it is to his or her advantage. When a person’s beliefs are threatened by an “inconvenient fact,” sometimes it is preferable to challenge the fact. This can happen at either a conscious or unconscious level (since sometimes the person we are seeking to convince  is ourselves), but the point is that this sort of post-truth relationship to facts occurs only when we are seeking to assert something 	. [3점]
* subordinate: 종속하는

35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Much of what we do each day is automatic and guided by habit, requiring little conscious awareness, and that’s not a bad thing. As Duhigg explains, our habits are necessary mental energy savers. ① We need to relieve our conscious minds so we can solve new problems as they come up. ② Once we’ve solved the puzzle of how to ballroom dance, for example, we can do it by habit, and so be mentally freed to focus on a conversation while dancing instead. ③ But try to talk when first learning to dance the tango, and it’s a disaster ― we need our conscious attention to focus on the steps. ④ Tango musicians bring different genres of music together to attract a more diverse audience from varying backgrounds. ⑤ Imagine how little we’d accomplish if we had to focus consciously on every behavior ― e.g., on where to place our feet for each step we take.

① to hold back our mixed feelings
② that balances our views on politics
③ that leads us to give way to others in need
④ to carry the constant value of absolute truth
⑤ that is more important to us than the truth itself









34. The debates between social and cultural anthropologists concern not the differences between the concepts but the analytical priority: which should come first, the social chicken or the cultural egg? British anthropology emphasizes the social. It assumes that social institutions determine culture and that universal domains of society (such as kinship, economy, politics, and religion) are represented by specific institutions (such as the family, subsistence farming, the British Parliament, and the Church of England) which can be compared cross-culturally. American anthropology emphasizes the cultural. It assumes that culture shapes social institutions by providing the shared beliefs, the core values, the communicative tools, and so on that make social life possible. It does not assume that there are universal social domains, preferring instead to discover domains empirically as aspects of each society’s own classificatory schemes ― in other words, its culture. And it rejects the notion that any social institution can be understood
 	. [3점]
* anthropology: 인류학 ** subsistence farming: 자급 농업
*** empirically: 경험적으로

[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.

(A) No citizen could be a full member of the community so long as she was tied to ancestral traditions with which the community might wish to break ― the problem of Antigone in Sophocles’ tragedy. Sovereignty and citizenship thus require not only borders in space, but also borders in time.
(B) Sovereignty and citizenship require freedom from the past at least as much as freedom from contemporary powers. No state could be sovereign if its inhabitants lacked the ability to change a course of action adopted by their forefathers in the past, or even one to which they once committed themselves.
(C) But freedom in space (and limits on its territorial extent) is merely one characteristic of sovereignty. Freedom in time (and limits on its temporal extent) is equally important and
probably more fundamental. [3점]

① in relation to its cultural origin
② in isolation from its own context
③ regardless of personal preferences
④ without considering its economic roots
⑤ on the basis of British-American relations

* sovereign: 주권의 ** territorial: 영토의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.





(A) The determinist, then, assumes that everything that occurs is a function of a finite number of causes and that, if these causes were known, an event could be predicted with complete accuracy. However, knowing all causes of an event is not necessary; the determinist simply  assumes that they exist and that as more causes are known, predictions become more accurate.
(B) The assumption that what is being studied can be understood in terms of causal laws is called determinism. Richard Taylor defined determinism as the philosophical doctrine that “states that for everything that ever happens there are conditions such that, given them, nothing else could happen.”
(C) For example, almost everyone would agree that the weather is a function of a finite number of variables such as sunspots, high-altitude jet streams, and barometric pressure; yet weather forecasts are always probabilistic because many of these variables change constantly, and others are simply unknown.
　
Representational theories of art treat the work of the artist as similar to that of the scientist. Both, so to speak, are involved in describing the external world. ( ① ) But by the nineteenth century, any comparison between the scientist and the artist was bound to make the artist look like a poor relation in terms of making discoveries about the world or holding a mirror up to nature. ( ② ) Here, science clearly had the edge. ( ③ ) The notion that art specialized in the expression of the emotions was particularly attractive in this light. ( ④ ) It rendered unto science its own ― the exploration of the objective world ― while saving something comparably important for art to do ― to explore the inner world of feeling. ( ⑤ ) If science held the mirror up to nature, art turned a mirror at the self and its experiences. [3점]
* vocation: 소명 ** stature: 수준 *** render: 주다

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

* altitude: 고도(高度) ** barometric: 기압의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　There is obviously a wide gap between the promises of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 and the real world of human-rights violations. In so far as we sympathize with the victims, we may criticize the UN and its member governments for failing to keep their promises. (  ① ) However, we cannot understand the gap between human-rights ideals and the real world of human-rights violations by sympathy or by legal analysis. ( ② ) Rather, it requires investigation by the various social sciences of the causes of social conflict and political oppression, and of the interaction between national and international politics. ( ③ ) The UN introduced the concept of human rights into international law and politics. ( ④ ) It is a leading feature of the human-rights field that the governments of the world proclaim human rights but have a highly variable record of implementing them. ( ⑤ ) We must understand why this is so.
* oppression: 억압











(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① fixed	…… share	② trapped	…… activate
③ standardized	…… control	④ localized …… share
⑤ underestimated …… activate


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)














(C)
(D) 












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Blind Spot in the Research of Ocean Biology
② The Ocean under the Microscope: A Breakthrough
③ What Ocean Research Needs: Pattern Recognition
④ Intuition vs. Experiment: Issues in Ocean Biology
⑤ Plankton Destroyed, Oceans Endangered

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Nancy와 Carol은 에펠탑에서 석양을 바라보았다.
② Carol은 Nancy에게 꽃다발을 직접 전달했다.
③ 레스토랑의 직원들은 모두 예의 바르고 친절했다.
④ Carol은 Nancy를 위해 깜짝 선물을 다양하게 준비했다.
⑤ Nancy와 Carol은 예약한 저녁 식사 시간에 늦었다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2022학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 영화를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 면접 준비를 해야 해서
② 아르바이트를 해야 해서
③ 요가 수업을 들어야 해서
④ 건강 검진을 받아야 해서

1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.

① 자선 경매 행사를 위한 자원봉사자를 모집하려고
② 지역 아동을 위한 자선 물품 기부를 독려하려고
③ 봉사 활동 확인서 발급 절차를 안내하려고
④ 아동 병원 설립의 필요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 자원봉사 사전 교육 일정을 공지하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 교사의 칭찬은 학생의 불안감을 낮출 수 있다.
② 예술 교육은 학생의 사회성 발달을 촉진시킨다.
③ 어휘를 배우는 것은 독해력 향상에 필수적이다.
④ 노래는 학생이 어휘를 쉽게 기억하도록 도와준다.
⑤ 음악 감상을 통해 학생의 창의력을 향상시킬 수 있다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 운전자 - 주차 관리 요원	② 동물 보호소 직원 - 기부자
③ 인테리어 디자이너 - 의뢰인	④ 건물 관리인 - 청소업체 직원
⑤ 애견용품 판매점 주인 - 손님

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

⑤ 동아리 모임에 참석해야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Spring Walking Challenge에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 운영 기간	② 참가 대상	③ 우승 상금
④ 주최 기관	⑤ 신청 방법

9. International Beatbox Championship에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 5월 10일부터 시작한다.
② 단독 공연과 단체 공연이 있다.
③ 전년도 우승자들이 심사 위원으로 참여한다.
④ 결승전은 온라인으로 생중계된다.
⑤ 표는 현장 구매가 가능하다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대여할 정수기를 고르시오.
Water Purifiers


①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.

① It wasn’t easy to discover my new hobby.
② I began taking drum lessons in middle school.
③ It was very hard to practice drums every day.
④ I brought them from my home for this festival.
⑤ I used to enjoy listening to modern rock music.


5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 테이블 설치하기	② 스피커 점검하기
③ 포스터 제작하기	④ 배지 배송 확인하기
⑤ 무선 마이크 가져오기

6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $108	② $110	③ $120	④ $162	⑤ $180
12. 
대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① No worries. His school grades will get better.
② Sure. I’ll adjust my schedule to join the event.
③ Wonderful. Your parents must be proud of you.
④ Hurry up. You’re really late for the school event.
⑤ Absolutely. I’m happy to invite your teacher here.




2	영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Man:  	

① No problem. I can help him find his future career.
② I got it. I’ll send you the website about promising jobs.
③ Don’t worry. I won’t be late for the counseling next time.
④ Of course. I’ll keep the appointment with my homeroom teacher.
⑤ Thanks. I’ll check it out and book a meeting with the counselor.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Woman:  	

① I’m sorry. I can’t imagine living without new technology.
② Cheer up. You’ll find more information from digital resources.
③ You get it. I’m sure it’ll help reduce your digital device usage.
④ That makes sense. We’re more productive using smartphones.
⑤ I agree. You can get more rest by giving up your painting time.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 Terry에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Amy:  	

① We’ll do great since we’ve worked so hard.
② I signed up for the contest, so don’t worry.
③ We need more practice to win the dance contest.
④ If you’re nervous, I’ll cancel the rehearsal for you.
⑤ You should follow my moves to correct your mistakes.


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① methods of obtaining nutrition by marine creatures
② causes of dramatic decrease in sea animal populations
③ ways for creatures in the ocean to protect themselves
④ difficulties in observing ocean animals’ hunting patterns
⑤ importance of adapting to new surroundings for sea creatures

17. 언급된 해양 생물이 아닌 것은?
① penguins	② sea horses	③ jellyfish
④ whales	⑤ oysters



18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 역사적 건축물 견학 프로그램을 홍보하려고
② 관광객 유치를 위한 아이디어를 제안하려고
③ 지역의 역사적 건축물 복원을 요청하려고
④ 박물관 보수 공사 일정 조정을 부탁하려고
⑤ 유적지 관리 실태 조사 결과를 공유하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Karim의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Karim was deep within the dense forest alone. He began to notice the strangeness of his surroundings. Scared, he hid under a tree, and he heard the “thump-thump” sound. Moments later, he saw a large elephant running toward him! He trembled uncontrollably and could hardly move. Suddenly, he remembered what he had read about elephants: Elephants are scared of loud noises. He also thought of the firecrackers in his pack. Quick as a flash, he lit them. The firecrackers burst with a loud noise, scaring away the elephant. Then, Karim ran away as fast as he could. By the time he reached his campsite, he was sure there was nothing dangerous around him. He could finally breathe easily. He put his hand on his chest, feeling his heartbeat slow back to its normal pace.
① hopeful → nervous	② fulfilled → regretful
③ jealous → satisfied	④ ashamed → grateful
⑤ terrified → relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 We try to avoid uncertainty by overanalyzing. But we don’t have complete control over how the future will play out. You may feel that if you can just answer your “worry question” once and for all, you will be satisfied and you can finally drop your rumination, but has this ever actually happened to you? Has there ever been an answer that allowed you to stop worrying? There is only one way out of this spiral, and that is not to try to gain control, but to give it up. Instead of pushing back against uncertainty, embrace it. Instead of trying to answer your worry question, deliberately practice leaving it unanswered. Don’t ask others and don’t think about it. Tell yourself that analysis is not the solution, but really just more of the same problem.
* rumination: 반추(反芻) ** spiral: 소용돌이
① 분석을 통해 미래의 불확실성을 통제하기보다 수용해야 한다.
② 타인에게 의존하기보다는 스스로 문제 해결력을 길러야 한다.
③ 걱정을 유발하는 문제 상황을 객관적으로 판단해야 한다.
④ 문제의 해결책을 찾기 전에 원인을 먼저 분석해야 한다.
⑤ 만일의 상황에 대비하여 꼼꼼하게 계획을 세워야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄 친 news ‘happens’가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
 Journalists love to report studies that are at the “initial findings” stages ? research that claims to be the first time anyone has discovered  a thing ? because  there is newsworthiness in their novelty. But “first ever” discoveries are extremely vulnerable to becoming undermined by subsequent research. When that happens, the news media often don’t go back and inform their audiences about the change ? assuming they even hear about it. Kelly Crowe, a CBC News reporter writes, quoting one epidemiologist, “There is increasing concern that in modern research, false findings may be the majority or even the vast majority of published research claims.” She goes on to suggest that journalists, though blameworthy for this tendency, are aided and abetted by the scientists whose studies they cite. She writes that the “conclusions” sections in scientific abstracts can sometimes be overstated in an attempt to draw attention from prestigious academic journals and media who uncritically take their bait. Even so, Crowe ends her piece by stressing that there is still an incompatibility between the purposes and processes of news and science: Science ‘evolves,’ but news ‘happens.’
* epidemiologist: 전염병학자 ** aid and abet: 방조하다
① News follows the process of research more than the outcome.
② News focuses not on how research changes but on the novelty of it.
③ News attracts attention by criticizing false scientific discoveries.
④ Reporters give instant feedback to their viewers, unlike scientists.
⑤ Reporters create and strengthen trust in the importance of science.

22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 To overcome death as the obstacle that was hindering the evolution of human intelligence, our ancestors developed the killer app that propelled our species forward, ahead of all others: namely, spoken and written language in words and maths. I believe communication was, and still is, our most valuable invention. It has helped us preserve the knowledge, learning, discoveries and intelligence we have gained and pass them on from person to person and from generation to generation. Imagine if Einstein had had no way of telling the rest of us about his remarkable understanding of the theory of relativity. In the absence of our incredible abilities to communicate, each and every one of us would need to discover relativity on his or her own. Leaps of human intelligence have happened, then, as a response to the way human society and culture developed. A lot of our intelligence resulted from our interaction with each other, and not just in response to our environments.
① 인간의 언어는 환경과의 상호 작용을 통해 발달한다.
② 인간의 지능 발달은 상호 간 의사소통의 결과물이다.
③ 과학의 발전은 인간 사회의 문화 보존에 필수적이다.
④ 언어의 변화가 세대 간 의사소통의 단절을 초래한다.
⑤ 기술에 대한 의존이 인간의 학습 능력 발달을 저해한다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 By the start of the 16th century, the Renaissance movement had given birth to the Protestant Reformation and an era of profound religious change. The art of this period reflected the disruption caused by this shift. Appropriately named the Baroque, meaning irregular or distorted, European painting in the 16th century largely focused on capturing motion, drama, action, and powerful emotion. Painters employed the strong visual tools of dramatic composition, intense contrast of light and dark, and emotionally provocative subject matter to stir up feelings of disruption. Religious subjects were often portrayed in this era through new dramatic visual language, a contrast to the reverential portrayal of religious figures in earlier traditions. In order to capture the social disruption surrounding Christianity and the Roman Catholic Church, many artists abandoned old standards of visual perfection from the Classical and Renaissance periods in their portrayal of religious figures.
* Protestant Reformation: 종교 개혁 ** reverential: 경건한

① characteristics of Baroque paintings caused by religious disruption
② impacts of the Baroque on the development of visual perfectionism
③ efforts of Baroque painters to imitate the Renaissance style
④ roles of Baroque artists in stabilizing the disrupted society
⑤ reasons of idealizing religious figures in Baroque paintings



24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Chimpanzees are known to hunt and eat red colobus monkeys. Although a solo male typically initiates a hunt, others often join in, and hunting success is much higher when chimps hunt as a group rather than individually. During the hunt, chimpanzees adopt different roles: one male might flush the monkeys from their refuge, while another blocks the escape route. Somewhere else, an ambusher hides, ready to make his deadly move. Although this sounds a lot like teamwork, recent work offers a simpler interpretation. Chimps are more likely to join others for hunts because larger hunting groups increase each individual’s chance of catching a monkey ? they aren’t interested in collective goals. The appearance of specialised roles in the hunt may also be an illusion: a simpler explanation is that each chimp places himself where his own chance of catching a monkey is highest, relative to the positions the others have already taken. Collaboration in chimps seems to emerge from an ‘every chimp for himself’ mentality.
* refuge: 은신처 ** ambusher: 복병

① Chimps’ Group Hunt: It’s All about Myself, Not Ourselves
② Obstacles to Chimps in Assigning Roles for Group Hunting
③ How One Selfish Chimp Can Ruin a Cooperative Group Hunt
④ Hunting in Concert with Other Chimps Determines Social Status!
⑤ Which Are Better Hunters, Cooperative or Competitive Chimps?




4	영어 영역

25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
New Cars in the EU by Fuel Type in 2018 and in 2020


TypeShare of New Cars (%) Gap (B-A)2018
(A)2020
(B)Gasoline55.647.5-8.1Diesel36.728-8.7Hybrid Electric411.97.9Alternative Fuels1.82.10.3Battery Electric15.44.4Plug-in Hybrid0.95.14.2
 The table above shows the share of new cars in the EU by fuel type in 2018 and in 2020. ① Compared to 2018, the share of both gasoline and diesel cars decreased in 2020. ② However, gasoline cars still held the largest share of new cars in 2020, followed by diesel vehicles, which made up more than a quarter of new cars in the same year. ③ Hybrid electric cars increased by 7.9 percentage points in the share of new cars from 2018 to 2020. ④ In 2018, the share of new cars powered by alternative fuels was larger than that of battery electric cars, but in 2020, the share of battery electric cars was more than twice that of cars using alternative fuels. ⑤ Plug-in hybrid vehicles were the only type of vehicle which accounted for less than 1% of new cars in 2018, and their share remained the smallest among all types of vehicle in 2020.




26. Antonia Brico에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Antonia Brico was born in the Netherlands in 1902 and immigrated to the United States at the age of six. After
attending a park concert when she was young, she was so inspired that she made up her mind to study music and become a conductor. In 1927, she entered the Berlin State Academy of Music and became the first American to graduate from its master class in conducting. In 1930, Brico made her debut as a professional conductor, for which she received positive reviews. She made an extensive European tour, and during the tour she was invited by Jean Sibelius to conduct the Helsinki Symphony Orchestra. Brico settled in Denver, where she continued to work as a conductor of the Denver Businessmen’s Orchestra, later renamed the Brico Symphony Orchestra. In 1974, her most famous student, folk singer Judy Collins, made a documentary film about her, which was nominated for an Academy Award.
① 네덜란드에서 태어나 6살에 미국으로 이주했다.
② 공원 콘서트에 참석한 후 지휘자가 되기로 결심했다.
③ 전문 지휘자로서의 데뷔에서 부정적인 평가를 받았다.
④ Denver에 정착해서 지휘자로 계속 일했다.
⑤ 그녀에 관한 영화가 아카데미상 후보에 올랐다.
27. 
Summer Metaverse Course에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?


① 고등학생을 위한 강좌이다.
② 4주간 토요일마다 2시간씩 운영된다.
③ 등록 마감일은 5월 28일이다.
④ 보호자가 서명한 허가서를 온라인으로 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 모든 수업에 참석하면 수료증을 받는다.
28. Bow Wow School for Dogs에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하는 것은?


① 주중과 주말에 모두 운영된다.
② 기본예절 교육에 배변 훈련은 제공되지 않는다.
③ 수업료에는 세금이 포함되어 있다.
④ 개를 등록하려면 사전에 백신 접종을 시켜야 한다.
⑤ 개의 개별 간식을 허용하지 않는다.






29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?

영어 영역	5
[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

 The actual problems with monopolies are caused by statism, not capitalism. Under a statist social system, taxes, subsidies, tariffs, and regulations often serve to protect existing large players in the marketplace. Those players often use crony tactics to retain or expand the protections: a new tariff preventing foreign competition, a subsidy making it harder for new players ① to compete with them, or a regulatory measure that a large company has the resources to comply with. Under a capitalist social system, on the other hand, the government has no say in how ② dominantly a company may become in its industry or how companies take over and merge with one another. Furthermore, a capitalist society doesn’t have rights-violating taxes, tariffs, subsidies, or regulations ③ favoring anybody nor does it have antitrust laws. Under capitalism, dominance can only be achieved by becoming really good at ④ what you’re doing. And to maintain dominance, you have to continue to stay ahead of the competition, which sees your dominance and profits as a sign ⑤ that there is money to be made by others as well.
* statism: 국가 통제주의 ** crony: 정실(사사로운 정에 이끌리는 일)
*** antitrust law: 독점 금지법













30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

 One of the most productive strategies to build customer relationships is to increase the firm’s share of customer rather than its market share. This strategy involves abandoning the old notions of ① acquiring new customers and increasing transactions to focus instead on more fully serving the needs of existing customers. Financial services are a great example of this. Most consumers purchase financial services from ② different firms. They bank at one institution, purchase insurance from another, and handle their investments elsewhere. To ③ solidify this purchasing pattern, many companies now offer all of these services under one roof. For example, Regions Financial Corporation offers retail and commercial banking, trust, mortgage, and insurance products to customers in a network of more than 1,500 offices. The company tries to more fully serve the financial needs of its ④ current customers, thereby acquiring a larger share of each customer’s financial business. By creating these types of relationships, customers have ⑤ little incentive to seek out competitive firms to fulfill their financial services needs.
31. 
Not only was Eurasia by chance blessed with biological
abundance, but the very 	of the continent greatly promoted the spread of crops between distant regions. When the supercontinent Pangea fragmented, it was torn apart along rifts that just so happened to leave Eurasia as a broad landmass running in an east-west direction ? the entire continent stretches more than a third of the way around the world, but mostly within a relatively narrow range of latitudes. As it is the latitude on the Earth that largely determines the climate and length of the growing season, crops domesticated in one part of Eurasia can be transplanted across the continent with only minimal need for adaptation to the new locale. Thus wheat cultivation spread readily from the uplands of Turkey throughout Mesopotamia, to Europe, and all the way round to India, for example. The twin continents of the Americas, by contrast, lie in a north-south direction. Here, the spreading of crops originally domesticated in one region to another led to a much harder process of re-adapting the plant species to different growing conditions. [3점]
* fragment: 조각나다 ** rift: 갈라진 틈

① isolation	② orientation
③ diversity	④ conservation
⑤ instability






32. When you are born, your neocortex knows almost nothing. It doesn’t know any words, what buildings are like, how to use a
computer, or what a door is and how it moves on hinges. It has to learn countless things. The overall structure of the neocortex is not random. Its size, the number of regions it has, and how they are connected together is largely determined by our genes. For example, genes determine what parts of the neocortex are connected to the eyes, what other parts are connected to the ears, and how those parts connect to each other. Therefore, we can say that the neocortex is structured at birth to see, hear, and even learn language. But it is also true that the neocortex doesn’t know what it will see, what it will hear, and what specific languages it might learn. We can think of the neocortex as starting life  	 but knowing nothing in particular. Through experience, it learns a rich and complicated model of the world.
* neocortex: (대뇌의) 신피질

① having some built-in assumptions about the world
② causing conflicts between genes and environments
③ being able to efficiently reprocess prior knowledge
④ controlling the structure and processing power of the brain
⑤ fighting persistently against the determined world of genes



6	영어 영역

33. While early clocks marked only the hour or quarter-hour,
by 1700 most clocks had acquired minute hands, and by 1800 second hands were standard. This unprecedented ability to measure time precisely 	, which became a prime weapon of the Industrial Revolution. As the historian of technology Lewis Mumford argued, “the clock, not the steam engine, is the key-machine of the modern industrial age.” Soon factory workers were clocking in, filling out timesheets, and being punished for lateness. With time sliced into smaller and smaller periods, business owners could measure the speed of their workers down to the second, and gradually increase the pace of the production line. Workers who tried to reject this strict control by “going slow” were swiftly fired. The cruel power of the clock fed the growing culture of utilitarian efficiency, so brilliantly depicted by Charles Dickens in his 1854 novel Hard Times, where the office of Mr. Gradgrind contained “a deadly statistical clock in it, which measured every second with a beat like a rap upon a coffin-lid.” [3점]
* rap: 두드림 ** coffin-lid: 관 뚜껑

① allowed workers to climb up the ladder of social class
② liberated workers but imprisoned employers in a time trap
③ found its most authoritarian expression in the factory clock
④ veiled the violent nature and the discipline of measured time
⑤ paved the way for workers to control manufacturing machines







34. Imagine some mutation appears which makes animals spontaneously die at the age of 50. This is unambiguously
disadvantageous ? but only very slightly so. More than 99 per cent of animals carrying this mutation will never experience its ill effects because they will die before it has a chance to act. This means that it’s pretty likely to remain in the population ? not because it’s good, but because the ‘force of natural selection’ at such advanced ages is not strong enough to get rid of it. Conversely, if a mutation killed the animals at two years, striking them down when many could reasonably expect to still be alive and producing children, evolution would get rid of it very promptly: animals with the mutation would soon be outcompeted by those fortunate enough not to have it, because the force of natural selection is powerful in the years up to and including reproductive age. Thus, problematic mutations can accumulate, just so long as 	. [3점]
* mutation: 돌연변이

① the force of natural selection increases as animals get older
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 What characterizes philosophy and science in early modern Europe and marks a break from earlier traditions is the concern to tailor theories to evidence rather than authority or tradition.
① Galileo Galilei, Francis Bacon, Ren? Descartes, and others formulated explanations of the heavens, of the natural world around them, and of human nature and society not by appealing to the proclamations of earlier thinkers. ② Nor were religious principles and ecclesiastic dogma their guiding lights. ③ Rather, they took their lead from reason ― what some thinkers called “the light of nature” ― and experience. ④ The fierce debates on the superiority of reason or experience continued, but all serious thinkers ultimately abandoned experience in the development of modern science and philosophy. ⑤ Whether they proceeded according to the logic of deduction or through the analysis of empirical data, the modern scientific method they developed consists in testing theories according to reason and in light of the available evidence.
* ecclesiastic dogma: 교회의 교리 ** deduction: 연역



[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) Given that gold mining cities and coal mining cities have risen and fallen, their vulnerability is obvious. A city where various people gather in various industries is secure against social changes. The same is true in the natural world, and the importance of biodiversity is essential for the sustainability of the species.
(B) This is because ensuring productivity and diversity is the driving force for sustainability. For example, if there is a place to work, people gather and work there, and the population gradually accumulates to form a city. However, the industrial structure that depends on a single industry is vulnerable to social changes.
(C) The same is true in cities. In a society where people of all ages and income levels live together, and diverse industries coexist while depending on each other, cities will continue to exist overcoming environmental changes such as population decline.








영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) Typically, in complex ecosystems when weather one year proves unsuitable for one set of plant species, it almost inevitably suits others. But in farming societies when harvests fail as a result of, for example, a sustained drought, then catastrophe emerges.
(B) This is firstly because foragers tended to live well within the natural limits imposed by their environments, and secondly because where farmers typically relied on one or two staple crops, foragers in even the harshest environments relied on dozens of different food sources and so were usually able to adjust their diets to align with an ecosystem’s own dynamic responses to changing conditions.
(C) But over longer periods of time farming societies were far more likely to suffer severe, existentially threatening famines than foragers. Foraging may be much less productive and generate far lower energy yields than farming but it is also much less risky. [3점]
* forager: 수렵 채집인 ** catastrophe: 참사 *** staple: 주요한

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



 Ore deposits represent work that nature does for us. ( ① ) For instance, Earth’s crust contains an average of about 55 ppm (parts per million) of copper, whereas copper ore deposits must contain about 5,000 ppm (0.5%) copper before we can mine them. ( ② ) Thus, geologic processes need to concentrate the average copper content of the crust by about 100 times to make a copper ore deposit that we can use. ( ③ ) We then use industrial processes to convert copper ore into pure copper metal, an increase of about 200 times. ( ④ ) Thus, we are likely to have larger deposits of mineral commodities that we use in large amounts. ( ⑤ ) As long as energy costs remain high, the relation between work that we can afford to do and work that we expect nature to do will control the lower limit of natural concentrations that we can exploit, and this puts very real limits on our global mineral resources. [3점]
* ore deposit: 광상(광물이 집적된 곳) ** Earth’s crust: 지각(地穀)
*** copper: 구리

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





 Power and knowledge, as well as ignorance, are interconnected in a productive and constitutive relationship. ( ① ) Rulers know that power cannot be executed without knowledge ? mortality tables, tax data, and the like are crucial to running an effective public administration ? and conquerors have understood that information is essential for dominating a territory. ( ② ) Since the twentieth century, Western societies have defined themselves as knowledge societies, where knowledge is essential for social organization and productivity. ( ③ ) For instance, secrets were essential to creating legitimacy in the early modern period, when individuals believed the world was created and ruled by divine power. ( ④ ) By concealing the circumstances of their decisions, rulers cultivated a special aura that set them apart from ordinary people and made them seem more like unknowable gods. ( ⑤ ) The complementary relationship between knowledge and ignorance is perhaps most exposed in transitional societies seeking to first disrupt and then stabilize social and political order. [3점]









$


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① escalated	…… focused	② escalated	…… creative
③ varied	…… hopeful	④ normalized …… keen
⑤ normalized …… calm




8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




(B)



(C)
(D) 



41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Decreased Trustworthiness of Warning Signals: A Cost of Deception
② Evolutionary Competition Between Deceiving Vocalizers and Detectors
③ Vocalizers Are Always the Winner in the Jungle of Deception!
④ Only the Strongest Send False Signals in the Animal World
⑤ On-going Arms Race in Nature: Major Cause of Migration

42. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로
가장 적절한 것은?

① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 어느 날 James의 오른팔이 부러졌다.
② James는 왼손으로 벽돌을 옮기기 시작했다.
③ 식당 주인은 James에게 50달러를 건넸다.
④ 옷을 잘 차려입은 남자가 식당 주인을 찾아왔다.
⑤ 식당 주인은 일부러 두 손으로 벽돌을 옮겼다.




2021학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 발명 대회 참가 신청 마감일 변경을 안내하려고
② 수업 과제의 온라인 제출 방법을 설명하려고
③ 학교 홈페이지 운영 도우미를 모집하려고
④ 발명 아이디어 우수 사례를 소개하려고
⑤ 발명가 초청 특별 강연을 홍보하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 보고서 주제는 구체적이어야 한다.
② 도표 활용은 자료 제시에 효과적이다.
③ 설문 대상에 따라 질문을 달리해야 한다.
④ 설문 조사자를 위한 사전 교육이 필요하다.
⑤ 보고서 작성 시 도표 제시 순서에 유의해야 한다.

3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 화가 － 기자	② 작곡가 － 가수
③ 시인 － 교사	④ 영화감독 － 배우
⑤ 무용가 － 사진작가

4. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의 내용과  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.














5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 저작권 확인하기	② 포스터 인쇄하기
③ 프린터 구매하기	④ 파일 전송하기
⑤ 만화 그리기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54	② $55	③ $60	④ $63	⑤ $70






7. 대화를 듣고, 동아리 봉사 활동이 연기된 이유를 고르시오.
① 기부받은 옷 정리 시간이 더 필요해서
② 동아리 홍보 동영상을 제작해야 해서
③ 중간고사 기간이 얼마 남지 않아서
④ 동아리 정기 회의를 개최해야 해서
⑤ 기부 행사 참가자가 부족해서

8. 대화를 듣고, Annual Charity Baseball Game에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 선수	② 일시	③ 입장료
④ 기념품	⑤ 장소

9. Kaufman Special Exhibition에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1995년에 처음 개최되었다.
② 월요일에는 열리지 않는다.
③ 올해의 주제는 예술과 기술의 결합이다.
④ 일일 관람객 수를 100명으로 제한한다.
⑤ 예매를 통해 할인을 받을 수 있다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 등록할 강좌를 고르시오.
Community Center Classes in July

①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’ll be back tomorrow.
② You liked the food there.
③ I go to the gym every day.
④ You should be here by six.
⑤ We finished dinner already.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① All right. I’ll take the bus then.
② No. My bicycle is broken again.
③ No problem. I’ll give you a ride.
④ Don’t worry. I’m already at school.
⑤ Indeed. I’m glad it’s getting warmer.




2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Absolutely. I was impressed after reading this script.
② No doubt. I think I acted well in the last comedy.
③ Great. I’ll write the script for your new drama.
④ I’m sorry. I’m not able to direct the movie.
⑤ Okay. I’ll let you know my decision soon.


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① That’s okay. You can reserve another place.
② I see. I should hurry to join your company event.
③ Why not? My company has its own sports facilities.
④ I agree. We should wait until the remodeling is done.
⑤ Thanks. I’ll call now to see if they’re available that day.


15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mary가 Steve에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Mary:   	
① Why don’t you take leave today and look after yourself?
② Your interests should be the priority in your job search.
③ You’d better actively support your teammates’ ideas.
④ Let’s find a way to increase sales of health products.
⑤ How about changing the details of the contract?


[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① reasons why chemicals are harmful to plants
② ways that plants protect themselves from danger
③ difficulties in preventing plants from overgrowing
④ tips for keeping dangerous insects away from plants
⑤ importance of recognizing poisonous plants in the wild


17. 언급된 식물이 아닌 것은?
① roses	② tomato plants	③ clovers
④ cherry trees	⑤ walnut trees
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

To whom it may concern,
　My name is Daniel. Since I joined your youth sports program several years ago, I have really enjoyed swimming. Thanks to your program, I have become a good swimmer. Now I want to go one step further. I like helping people and hope to get a job as a lifeguard later. So I tried to sign up for your lifeguard training course this summer. But the course was so popular that the registration closed almost as soon as it opened. I couldn’t register and was really disappointed. I heard some of my friends couldn’t, either. I’m kindly asking you to open an additional course. I appreciate your consideration.
Sincerely, Daniel Smith
① 구조원 양성 과정의 추가 개설을 요청하려고
② 구조원 양성 과정의 우수성을 홍보하려고
③ 동계 수영 강습 프로그램 수강을 신청하려고
④ 수영 강사 일자리가 있는지 문의하려고
⑤ 구조원 양성 과정의 등록 방법을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Sharon의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Sharon received a ticket to an upcoming tango concert from her friend. While surfing the Internet, she came across a review for
the concert. The reviewer was harsh, calling it “an awful performance.” That raised in Sharon’s mind the question of whether it was worthwhile to go, but in the end, she reluctantly decided to attend the concert. The hall located in the old town was ancient and run-down. Looking around, Sharon again wondered what kind of show she could expect. But as soon as the tango started, everything changed. The piano, guitar, flute, and violin magically flew out in harmony. The audience cheered. “Oh my goodness! What fantastic music!” Sharon shouted. The rhythm and tempo were so energetic and sensational that they shook her body and soul. The concert was far beyond her expectations.
① excited  → bored	② doubtful  → amazed
③ calm      → upset	④ ashamed  → grateful
⑤ envious → indifferent
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Occasionally individuals do not merely come out as well as clearly state what is troubling them and instead select more indirect means of expressing their annoyance. One companion might talk to the various other in a way that is condescending and also indicates underlying hostility. Numerous other times, partners may mope and even frown without genuinely dealing with an issue. Companions may likewise merely prevent discussing an issue by swiftly switching over topics when the subject turns up or by being incredibly vague. Such indirect ways of expressing temper are not useful since they don’t provide the individual that is the target of the behaviors, an idea of exactly how to react. They understand their companion is irritated, but the absence of directness leaves them without advice regarding what they can do to solve the issue.
* condescend: 거들먹거리다 ** mope: 울적해하다
① 이성보다 감정에 호소하여 상대방을 설득해야 한다.
② 상대방의 기분을 상하게 하는 행동을 자제해야 한다.
③ 문제 해결을 위해서는 문제를 직접적으로 언급해야 한다.
④ 타인의 입장을 이해하려면 경청하는 자세를 가져야 한다.
⑤ 목표 달성을 방해하는 문제점을 지속적으로 파악해야 한다.




	 3


21. 밑줄 친 journey edges가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Many ancillary businesses that today seem almost core at one time started out as journey edges. For example, retailers often boost sales with accompanying support such as assembly or installation services. Think of a home goods retailer selling an unassembled outdoor grill as a box of parts and leaving its customer’s mission incomplete. When that retailer also sells assembly and delivery, it takes another step in the journey to the customer’s true mission of cooking in his backyard. Another example is the business-to-business service contracts that are layered on top of software sales. Maintenance, installation, training, delivery, anything at all that turns do-it-yourself into a do-it-for-me solution originally resulted from exploring the edge of where core products intersect with customer journeys.
* ancillary: 보조의, 부차적인  ** intersect: 교차하다
① requiring customers to purchase unnecessary goods
② decreasing customers’ dependence on business services
③ focusing more on selling end products than components
④ adding a technological breakthrough to their core products
⑤ providing extra services beyond customers’ primary purchase







22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Official definitions of sport have important implications. When a definition emphasizes rules, competition, and high performance, many people will be excluded from participation or avoid other physical activities that are defined as “second class.” For example, when a 12-year-old is cut from an exclusive club soccer team, she may not want to play in the local league because she sees it as “recreational activity” rather than a real sport. This can create a situation in which most people are physically inactive at the same time that a small number of people perform at relatively high levels for large numbers of fans ― a situation that negatively impacts health and increases health-care costs in a society or community. When sport is defined to include a wide range of physical activities that are played for pleasure and integrated into local expressions of social life, physical activity rates will be high and overall health benefits are likely.
① 운동선수의 기량은 경기 자체를 즐길 때 향상된다.
② 공정한 승부를 위해 합리적인 경기 규칙이 필요하다.
③ 스포츠의 대중화는 스포츠 산업의 정의를 바꾸고 있다.
④ 스포츠의 정의는 신체 활동 참여와 건강에 영향을 미친다.
⑤ 활발한 여가 활동은 원만한 대인 관계 유지에 도움이 된다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Problem framing amounts to defining what problem you are proposing to solve. This is a critical activity because the frame you choose strongly influences your understanding of the problem, thereby conditioning your approach to solving it. For an illustration, consider Thibodeau and Broditsky’s series of experiments in which they asked people for ways to reduce crime in a community. They found that the respondents’ suggestions changed significantly depending on whether the metaphor used to describe crime was as a virus or as a beast. People presented with a metaphor comparing crime to a virus invading their city emphasized prevention and addressing the root causes of the problem, such as eliminating poverty and improving education. On the other hand, people presented with the beast metaphor focused on remediations: increasing the size of the police force and prisons.
① importance of asking the right questions for better solutions
② difficulty of using a metaphor to find solutions to a problem
③ reasons why problem framing prevents solutions from appearing
④ usefulness of preventive measures in reducing community crime
⑤ effect of problem framing on approaching and solving problems





24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A common error in current Darwinian thinking is the assumption that “selfish genes” are the prime mover in evolution. In strict Darwinism the prime mover is environmental threat. In the absence of threat, natural selection tends to resist change. It is un-biological to “explain” behavioural change as resulting from genetic change or the ex vacuo emergence of domain-specific brain modules. Evolutionary psychologists surely know why brains evolved: as Cosmides and Tooby point out, brains are found only in animals that move. Brains are behavioural organs, and behavioural adaptation, being immediate and non-random, is vastly more efficient than genetic adaptation. So, in animals with brains, behavioural change is the usual first response to environmental threat. If the change is successful, genetic adaptation to the new behaviour will follow more gradually. Animals do not evolve carnivore teeth and then decide it might be a good idea to eat meat.
* ex vacuo: 무(無)에서의 ** carnivore: 육식 동물
① Which Adapts First, Behaviour or Genes?
② The Brain Under Control of Selfish Genes
③ Why Animals Eat Meat: A Story of Survival
④ Genes Always Win the Battle Against Nature!
⑤ The Superior Efficiency of Genetic Adaptation




4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Global Plastic Waste Generation by Industry in 2015

Market SectorsMillion Tons%Packaging14146.69Textiles3812.58Consumer and Institutional Products3712.25Transportation175.63Electrical and Electronic134.30Building and Construction134.30Industrial Machinery10.33Others4213.91Total302100Note: Due to rounding, the percentages may not sum to 100%.

　The above table shows global plastic waste generation by industry in 2015. ① The sector that generated plastic waste most was packaging, accounting for 46.69% of all plastic  waste generated. ② The textiles sector generated 38 million tons of plastic waste, or 12.58% of the total plastic waste generated. ③ The consumer and institutional products sector generated 37 million tons of plastic waste, and the amount was more than twice that of plastic waste the transportation sector generated. ④ The electrical and electronic sector generated just as much plastic waste as the building and construction sector did, each sector accounting for 8.60% of the total plastic waste generation. ⑤ Only one million tons of plastic waste were generated in the industrial machinery sector, representing less than 0.50% of the total plastic waste generated.

26. William McDougall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Born in Lancashire, England, in 1871, William McDougall left his mark on experimental and physiological psychology. After receiving a degree in natural sciences in Cambridge University, he became interested in human behavior. He believed human behavior to be based on three abilities ― intellect, emotion, and will. Being a hardworking scholar, he held academic positions in several universities in England. He also wrote many books on psychology including the well-known Introduction to Social Psychology. In 1920, he published The Group Mind opposing mechanistic interpretations of human behavior. However, The Group Mind was poorly received when published. Somewhat disappointed, he moved to the United States in the same year to be a professor at Harvard University. Seven years later, he moved to Duke University, where he developed a psychology department and continued various research. Today many people read his books, and psychologists celebrate his intellectual achievements.
① Cambridge University에서 학위를 받았다.
② 인간 행동이 세 가지 능력에 근거한다고 믿었다.
③ The Group Mind는 출판되었을 때 매우 인정받았다.
④ Duke University에서 다양한 연구를 계속하였다.
⑤ 오늘날 심리학자들은 그의 지적 업적을 기린다.
27. 
Singing Tommy 사용에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 인터넷에 연결되지 않아도 노래를 재생할 수 있다.
② 사용 전에 두 개의 AA  건전지를 넣어야 한다.
③ 모자를 누르면 노래가 시작된다.
④ 다섯 곡의 노래 중에 선택할 수 있다.
⑤ 방수가 되지 않는다.

28. 2020 Crime & Spy Science Workshop에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 이틀 동안 진행된다.
② 참가비에 보험이 포함되어 있다.
③ 등록은 이메일로만 할 수 있다.
④ 점심과 간식은 제공되지 않는다.
⑤ 적절한 도구를 선택하는 방법을 배울 것이다.




	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　People from more individualistic cultural contexts tend to be motivated to maintain self-focused agency or control ① as these serve as the basis of one’s self-worth. With this form of agency comes the belief that individual successes ② depending primarily on one’s own abilities and actions, and thus, whether by influencing the environment or trying to accept one’s circumstances, the use of control ultimately centers on the individual. The independent self may be more ③ driven to cope by appealing to a sense of agency or control. However, people from more interdependent cultural contexts tend to be less focused on issues of individual success and agency and more motivated towards group goals and harmony. Research has shown ④ that East Asians prefer to receive, but not seek, more social support rather than seek personal control in certain cases. Therefore, people ⑤ who hold a more interdependent self-construal may prefer to cope in a way that promotes harmony in relationships.
* self-construal: 자기 구성







30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Chunking is vital for cognition of music. If we had to encode it in our brains note by note, we’d ① struggle to make sense of anything more complex than the simplest children’s songs. Of course, most accomplished musicians can play compositions containing many thousands of notes entirely from ② memory, without a note out of place. But this seemingly awesome accomplishment of recall is made ③ improbable by remembering the musical process, not the individual notes as such. If you ask a pianist to start a Mozart sonata from bar forty-one, she’ll probably have to ④ mentally replay the music from the start until reaching that bar ― the score is not simply laid out in her mind, to be read from any random point. It’s rather like describing how you drive to work: you don’t simply recite the names of roads as an abstract list, but have to construct your route by mentally retracing it. When musicians make a mistake during rehearsal,
they wind back to the ⑤ start of a musical phrase (‘let’s take it from the second verse’) before restarting.
* chunking: 덩어리로 나누기 ** bar: (악보의) 마디

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. Research with human runners challenged conventional wisdom and found that the ground-reaction forces at the foot and the shock transmitted up the leg and through the body  after impact with the ground 	as runners moved from extremely compliant to extremely hard running surfaces. As a result, researchers gradually began to believe that runners are subconsciously able to adjust leg  stiffness prior to foot strike based on their perceptions of the hardness  or stiffness of the surface on which they are running. This  view suggests that runners create soft legs that soak up impact forces when they are running on very hard surfaces and stiff legs when they are moving along on yielding terrain. As a result,  impact  forces  passing  through  the  legs  are strikingly
similar over a wide range of running surface types. Contrary to popular belief, running on concrete is not more damaging to  the legs than running on soft sand. [3점]
* compliant: 말랑말랑한 ** terrain: 지형
① varied little
② decreased a lot
③ suddenly peaked
④ gradually appeared
⑤ were hardly generated

32. One of the great risks of writing is that even the simplest of choices regarding wording or punctuation can sometimes
 	 in ways that may seem unfair. For example, look again at the old grammar rule forbidding the splitting of infinitives. After decades of telling students to never split an infinitive (something just done in   this sentence), most composition experts now  acknowledge that a split infinitive is not a grammar crime. Suppose you  have written a position paper trying to convince your city council of the need to hire security personnel for the library, and half of the council members ― the people you wish to convince ― remember their eighth-grade grammar teacher’s warning about splitting infinitives. How will they respond when you tell them, in your introduction, that librarians are compelled “to always accompany” visitors to the rare book room because of the threat of damage? How much of their attention have you suddenly lost because of their automatic recollection of what is now a nonrule? It is possible, in other words, to write correctly and still offend your readers’ notions of your language competence.
* punctuation: 구두점 ** infinitive: 부정사(不定詞)
① reveal your hidden intention
② distort the meaning of the sentence
③ prejudice your audience against you
④ test your audience’s reading comprehension
⑤ create fierce debates about your writing topic




6	


33. Even when we do something as apparently simple as picking up a screwdriver, our brain automatically 	.
We can literally feel things with the end of the screwdriver. When we extend a hand, holding the screwdriver, we automatically take the length of the latter into account. We can probe difficult-to-reach places with its extended end, and comprehend what we are exploring. Furthermore, we instantly regard the screwdriver we are holding as “our” screwdriver, and get possessive about it. We do the same with the much more complex tools we use, in much more complex situations. The cars we pilot instantaneously and automatically become ourselves. Because of this, when someone bangs his fist on   our car’s hood after we have irritated him at a crosswalk, we take it personally. This is not always reasonable. Nonetheless, without the extension of self into machine, it would be impossible to drive. [3점]
* probe: 탐색하다
① recalls past experiences of utilizing the tool
② recognizes what it can do best without the tool
③ judges which part of our body can best be used
④ perceives what limits the tool’s functional utility
⑤ adjusts what it considers body to include the tool









34. A large part of what we see is what we expect to see. This explains why we “see” faces and figures in a flickering campfire, or in moving clouds. This is why Leonardo da Vinci advised artists to discover their motifs by staring at patches on a blank wall. A fire provides a constant flickering change in visual information that never integrates into anything solid and thereby allows the brain to engage in a play of hypotheses. On the other hand, the wall does not present us with very much in the way of visual clues, and so the brain begins to make more and more hypotheses and desperately searches for confirmation. A crack in the wall looks a little like the profile of a nose and suddenly a whole face appears, or a leaping horse, or a  dancing figure. In cases like these the brain’s visual strategies are 	. [3점]
* flicker: 흔들리다
① ignoring distracting information unrelated to visual clues
② projecting images from within the mind out onto the world
③ categorizing objects into groups either real or imagined
④ strengthening connections between objects in the real world
⑤ removing the broken or missing parts of an original image
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　One of the most widespread, and sadly mistaken, environmental myths is that living “close to nature” out in the country or in a leafy suburb is the best “green” lifestyle. Cities, on the other hand, are often blamed as a major cause of ecological destruction ― artificial, crowded places that suck up precious resources. Yet, when you look at the facts, nothing could be farther from the truth. ① The pattern of life in the country and most suburbs involves long hours in the automobile each week, burning fuel and pumping out exhaust to get to work, buy groceries, and take kids to school and activities. ② City dwellers, on the other hand, have the option of walking or taking transit to work, shops, and school. ③ The larger yards and houses found outside cities also create an environmental cost in terms of energy use, water use, and land use. ④ This illustrates the tendency that most city dwellers get tired of urban lives and decide to settle in the countryside. ⑤ It’s clear that the future of the Earth depends on more people gathering together in compact communities.
* compact: 밀집한

[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) High levels of adversity predicted poor mental health, as expected, but people who had faced intermediate levels of adversity were healthier than those who experienced little adversity, suggesting that moderate amounts of stress can foster resilience. A follow-up study found a similar link between the amount of lifetime adversity and subjects’ responses to laboratory stressors.
(B) Intermediate levels of adversity were predictive of the greatest resilience. Thus, having to deal with a moderate amount of stress may build resilience in the face of future stress.
(C) In other words, the adaptation process initiated by stress can lead to personal changes for the better. One study that measured participants’ exposure to thirty-seven major negative events found a curvilinear relationship between lifetime adversity and mental health.
* resilience: 회복력
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




	 7

37.	39.





(A) If ripening could be slowed down by interfering with ethylene production or with the processes that respond to ethylene, fruit could be left on the plant until it was ripe and full of flavour but would still be in good condition when it arrived at the supermarket shelf.
(B) In some countries they are then sprayed with ethylene before sale to the consumer to induce ripening. However, fruit picked before it is ripe has less flavour than fruit picked ripe from the plant. Biotechnologists therefore saw an opportunity in delaying the ripening and softening process in fruit.
(C) The problem for growers and retailers is that ripening is followed sometimes quite rapidly by deterioration and decay and the product becomes worthless. Tomatoes and other fruits are, therefore, usually picked and transported when they are unripe. [3점]
　
Fireflies don’t just light up their behinds to attract mates, they also glow to tell bats not to eat them. This twist in the tale of the trait that gives fireflies their name was discovered by Jesse Barber and his colleagues. The glow’s warning role benefits both fireflies and bats, because these insects taste disgusting to the mammals. ( ① ) When swallowed, chemicals released by fireflies cause bats to throw them back up. ( ② ) The team placed eight bats in a dark room with three or four fireflies plus three times as many tasty insects, including beetles and moths, for four days. ( ③ ) During the first night, all the bats captured at least one firefly. ( ④ ) But by  the fourth night, most bats had learned to avoid fireflies and catch all the other prey instead. ( ⑤ ) It had long been thought that firefly bioluminescence mainly acted as a mating signal, but the new finding explains why firefly larvae also glow despite being immature for mating.
* bioluminescence: 생물 발광(發光) ** larvae: larva(애벌레)의 복수형

* deterioration: (품질의) 저하
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
40. 
다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?



Compounding the difficulty, now more than ever, is what ergonomists call information overload, where a leader is overrun with inputs ― via e-mails, meetings, and phone calls ― that only distract and confuse her thinking.
　Clarity is often a difficult thing for a leader to obtain. Concerns of the present tend to seem larger than potentially greater concerns that lie farther away. ( ① ) Some decisions  by their nature present great complexity, whose  many  variables must come together a certain way for the leader to succeed. ( ② ) Alternatively, the leader’s information  might be only fragmentary, which might cause her to fill in the gaps with assumptions ― sometimes without recognizing them as such. ( ③ ) And the merits of a leader’s most important decisions, by their nature, typically are not clear-cut. ( ④ ) Instead those decisions involve a process  of assigning weights to competing interests, and then determining, based  upon  some criterion, which one predominates. ( ⑤ ) The result is one of judgment, of shades of gray; like saying that Beethoven is a better composer than Brahms. [3점]
* ergonomist: 인간 공학자 ** fragmentary: 단편적인














Since fossilization and fossil discovery are affected by
     (A) conditions, the fossil evidence of a taxon cannot definitely (B) its population size or the times of its appearance and extinction.
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① experimental …… confirm	② experimental …… reveal
③ environmental…… clarify	④ environmental…… conceal
⑤ accidental	…… mask




8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)



(C)
(D) 













41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Water Rights No Longer Tied to Land
② Strategies for Trading Water  Rights
③ Water Storage Methods: Mountain vs. Desert
④ Water Supplies Not Stable in Mountain Regions
⑤ Unending Debates: Which Crop We Should Grow

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Steven은 집 앞 계단에 앉아 편지를 자세히 읽었다.
② 방과 후에 집으로 돌아오는 Steven의 발걸음은 무거웠다.
③ 아버지는 Steven에게 옳은 일을 하라고 조언했다.
④ 에세이 대회에서 우승한 사람은 Stephanie였다.
⑤ Steven은 여동생과 놀이공원에 갈 계획이었다.


















































	 	 

























     

		 

	 

	 










  


 	  

	 	 		 	 





  	 	 	 

  	  	

 




 

   	  	  

  	   	   

 	



























	          

	  

	          





	   

	           

             

    	 

  		     



	       
	 

	    
























  




  



 


  
 
 

 
  


  










	 

          	  
          



       
        	   































  	 


  	    
















































































































































































































































































































































제 3 교시

2020학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① In fact, I’m not sure what the problem is.
② Well, you’d better ice your sprained ankle.
③ You’re right. I’d rather stay at home and rest.
④ One week or so, but I have to see how it heals.
⑤ Terrible. I should have worn a cast for two weeks.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Great. Let’s go shopping together.
② No. I haven’t decided on my survey topic.
③ Okay. Please send me the link to the survey.
④ Yes. I’ve finished writing the survey questions.
⑤ I see. I’ll take the marketing class online today.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 개조 공사 중 박물관 운영에 대해 안내하려고
② 박물관 시설 안전 점검 계획을 공지하려고
③ 박물관 개관식 참석을 요청하려고
④ 전시관 관람 시 안전 질서 유지를 당부하려고
⑤ 시설 파손에 따른 불편에 대해 양해를 구하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자원 재활용 교육을 강화해야 한다.
② 일상생활에서 플라스틱 소비를 줄여야 한다.
③ 친환경 플라스틱 제품 개발을 확대해야 한다.
④ 해양 생태계 보존을 위한 기금 마련이 필요하다.
⑤ 일회용품 사용 규제를 위한 법률 제정이 시급하다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 교사 ? 체험농장 운영자	② 관광객 ? 버스 운전기사
③ 수강생 ? 요리학원 강사	④ 학생 ? 동물원 사육사
⑤ 고객 ? 키즈 카페 직원


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 선물 포장하기	② 파티 의상 찾아오기
③ 축하 영상 편집하기	④ 생일 케이크 주문하기
⑤ 카메라 배터리 충전하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 응시할 스페인어 시험이 연기된 이유를 고르시오.

① 졸업 시험과 날짜가 겹쳐서
② 수업 진도를 다 마치지 못해서
③ 수강생들이 시험 연기를 요청해서
④ 강사가 해외 세미나에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 수강생 중 다수가 구직 면접을 보러 가서

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $60	② $63	③ $70	④ $72	⑤ $80

10. 대화를 듣고, Classic Myanmar Tour에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.

① 기간	② 방문 도시	③ 이동 수단
④ 비용	⑤ 최대 참가 인원

11. 2020 Student Infographic Contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 모든 학년의 학생이 참여할 수 있다.
② 주제는 자유롭게 선택 가능하다.
③ 출품작을 이미지 파일로 제출해야 한다.
④ 수상자는 상품으로 영화 관람권을 받을 것이다.
⑤ 수상작은 한 달 동안 전시될 것이다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구매할 눈 마사지기를
고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Eye Massagers


①
②
③
④
⑤


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Sure, you can take the boxes home if you want.
② Well, my children have lost interest in smartphones.
③ I agree. Storing the phones in a box isn’t the answer.
④ Actually, we need to update our phones on a regular basis.
⑤ Definitely. I’ll get a box and see if it works for my family.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Great. Let’s ask her if she can help us with the interview.
② Sure. I’ll look at the questions and tell you what I think.
③ Don’t worry. I’ll recommend a good translator for her.
④ Wow! I didn’t know you are that good at Chinese.
⑤ Right. Mr. Chen is fluent in both languages.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Alex가 Carol에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Alex:  	
① I think you need to take a break right now.
② Why not sign up for the presentation contest?
③ Don’t be afraid if you’re selected as a representative.
④ You’d better set aside your routine activities for a while.
⑤ How about setting a daily plan to prepare for the contest?
[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① positive effects of regular exercise on flexibility
② using ordinary household items for home exercise
③ physical benefits of doing household chores
④ maintaining workout equipment properly
⑤ useful tips on buying home appliances
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① chair	② towel	③ broomstick
④ basket	⑤ water bottle









① 학교 설립 절차에 대해 문의하려고
② 학교 개교를 위한 기부를 요청하려고
③ 신설된 학교의 신입생 모집을 안내하려고
④ 장학금 수혜 대상자 선정 결과를 통지하려고
⑤ 지역 내 아동을 위한 교육 프로그램을 홍보하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The hotel lobby was elegant and well lit. Good, light brown woodwork and stainless steel. A short metro carriage runs through this place carrying executives. I am well dressed in a charcoal colour suit with a matching tie and black shoes. I feel great thinking I am fitted out to charm any crowd. But I forget where I’ve left my briefcase and laptop. I stop the metro and tell them that I need to check for my bag in their glass bag carriage. I find all sorts of bags except mine. I doubt whether I have brought it with me to this country at all. Mr nice guy that I am, I don’t like to keep others waiting. I let the metro move which moves quickly and is almost out of sight when I realise that one of my expensive shoes is missing! I must have left it in the cabin while looking for the bag and the metro has left. I feel myself blushing.
① nervous → relieved	② delighted → bored
③ curious → disappointed	④ surprised → indifferent
⑤ satisfied → embarrassed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Here’s something to consider: If you have a friend whose friendship you wouldn’t recommend to your sister, or your father, or your son, why would you have such a friend for yourself? You might say: out of loyalty. Well, loyalty is not identical to stupidity. Loyalty must be negotiated, fairly and honestly. Friendship is a reciprocal arrangement. You are not morally obliged to support someone who is making the world a worse place. Quite the opposite. You should choose people who want things to be better, not worse. It’s a good thing, not a selfish thing, to choose people who are good for you. It’s appropriate and praiseworthy to associate with people whose lives would be improved if they saw your life improve.
① 더 나은 삶과 세상을 지향하는 사람과 사귀어야 한다.
② 부모는 자녀와 교우 관계에 대해 자주 대화해야 한다.
③ 우정을 지키려면 변함없는 신의를 보여줘야 한다.
④ 원만한 인간관계를 위해 이기적인 태도를 버려야 한다.
⑤ 가족의 의사결정은 모든 구성원의 합의로 이루어져야 한다.




영어 영역	3

21. 밑줄   친   faulty        storytelling이        다음   글에서   의미하는   바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　In recent years I’ve come to see that, amazingly, the key to   almost   all   of  our   problems   is   faulty    storytelling,    because it’s storytelling that drives the way we gather and spend our energy. I believe that stories ― not the ones people tell us but the ones we tell ourselves ― determine nothing less than our personal and professional destinies. And the most important story you will ever tell about yourself is the story you tell to yourself. So, you’d better examine  your story,  especially this one that’s supposedly  the most familiar of all. “The most erroneous stories are those we think we know best ― and therefore never scrutinize or question,” said paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould. Participate in your story rather than observing it from afar; make sure it’s a story that compels you. Tell yourself the right story ― the rightness of which only you can really determine. If you’re finally living the story you want, then it needn’t ― it shouldn’t and won’t ― be an ordinary one. It can and will be extraordinary. After all, you’re not just the author of your story but also its main character, the hero. Heroes are never ordinary.
* scrutinize: 면밀히 조사하다 ** paleontologist: 고생물학자
① failing to live a self­determined life
② obsessing over the regrets of the past
③ not thinking we are the same as others
④ attributing someone else’s faults to ourselves
⑤ speaking ill of others by creating a false story

22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A question can be raised about the basic notion that sensitivity to problems is critical in setting the creative process in motion. It is no doubt true that many people are motivated to carry out creative activities because of problems they sense in their personal or professional environments. However, there is historical evidence that the creative process can be set in motion without necessity, even in the domain of invention. As one example, consider the invention of the airplane. At the end of the nineteenth century a number of research projects were underway whose purpose was the invention of a flying machine. At that time, there was no need for such a machine; only gradually, after the Wright brothers were successful in inventing the airplane, did the broader implications of that invention become apparent. So the driving force behind the invention of the airplane seems not to have been necessity: There was no need to fly; people simply wanted to.
① 논리적 사고는 창의력 발휘를 저해한다.
② 필요는 창의성 발현을 위한 필수 조건이 아니다.
③ 다양한 경험이 반드시 발명에 유익한 것은 아니다.
④ 문제 해결 능력은 문제에 대한 민감성에서 비롯된다.
⑤ 창의적 산출물을 만들기 위해 지식의 축적이 필요하다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Pet owners sometimes tire of their animals or become overwhelmed by caring for a large number of pets or a difficult pet. Rather than face the stress of turning the pet in to a shelter, owners drive pets far from their home range and abandon them. Some people believe the animal has a better chance to survive roaming free than at a shelter, a false belief formed to salve the pet abandoner’s conscience. Releasing your pet, whether a cat, rabbit, or bearded dragon, is not the answer. Typically, people report roaming dogs for pickup by animal control authorities, who take the dog to the local shelter. Cats and exotic or unusual animals, unless confined to a small area, are not usually discovered or reported. Released pets not captured and sheltered suffer from weather, wild predators, and a lack of adequate food. Some pets die a difficult death. Other released pets survive and breed successfully. In these cases, the survivor pets become an invasive species and the environment suffers.
* salve: (죄책감을) 덜다
① struggles of wild animals to survive in nature
② importance of expanding shelters for released pets
③ why pet owners should not set unwanted pets free
④ how to prevent pet owners from abandoning their pets
⑤ conditions essential to maintaining pets’ physical health








24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The borderless­world thesis has been vigorously criticized by many geographers on the grounds that it presents a simplistic and idealized vision of globalization. It appears that the more territorial borders fall apart, the more various groups around the world cling to place, nation, and religion as markers of their identity. In other words, the reduction in capacity of territorial borders to separate and defend against others often elicits adverse reactions in numerous populations. Difference between people and places may be socially constructed through the erection of boundaries, but this does not mean that it is not deeply internalized by the members of a society. So far, the consumption­dominated rhetoric of globalization has done little to uncouple the feeling of difference that borders create from the formation of people’s territorial identities.

① Recognizing Differences: The Beginning of Mutual Respect
② Do Fading Borders Lead to Less Division Among People?
③ A Borderless World: The Key to Global Well­Being
④ Ethnic Identities: Just the Remains of the Past
⑤ How Territories Form and What Defines Them




4	영어 영역


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



　The above graph shows the global sales expectations of internal combustion (IC) cars and electric cars from 2020 through 2040. ① Overall, electric car sales are expected to be on the rise for the next 20 years until 2040 while IC car sales are anticipated to reach their peak in 2025 and decrease afterwards. ② In 2025, IC and electric car sales are each expected to grow by five million units compared to 2020. ③ Until 2035, IC cars are projected to still sell more than electric cars, but the story changes in 2040 when electric car sales are predicted to outnumber those of IC cars. ④ In 2035, the sales gap between IC and electric cars is expected to be smaller compared to that of 2030, with electric cars selling over 50 million units. ⑤ In 2040, 65 million electric cars are anticipated to be sold globally, which is ten million more than IC car sales.
* internal combustion: 내연식의

26. B?la Bart?k에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Born in Nagyszentmiklos, Hungary, B?la Bart?k began composing music at the age of nine. At eleven Bart?k played in public for the first time. The performance included a composition of his own. He later studied at the Royal Hungarian Academy of Music, following the lead of another eminent Hungarian composer, Ern? Dohn?nyi. From 1905, he began a long collaboration with fellow Hungarian Zolt?n Kod?ly in trying to popularize Hungarian folk songs and gained a practical knowledge of string writing from both folk and classical musicians. Bart?k had a successful career as a pianist, performing throughout Europe and in the United States with musicians such as the jazz clarinetist Benny Goodman. With the rise of fascism, he refused to play in Germany after 1933. In 1940, he left Budapest for the United States and died there in 1945.

① 11세에 처음으로 대중 앞에서 연주했다.
② Royal Hungarian Academy of Music에서 공부했다.
③ 헝가리 민요를 대중화하려고 Zolt?n Kod?ly와 협업했다.
④ 피아노 연주자로서 성공을 거두었다.
⑤ 1933년 이후 주로 독일에서 연주 활동을 했다.
27. 
Discover Scuba Class에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?


① 참가자의 나이는 10세 이상이어야 한다.
② 실내 수영장에서 스쿠버다이빙 실습을 한다.
③ 장비 대여료는 강습료와 별도로 지불해야 한다.
④ 강습은 1회 과정이다.
⑤ 강습 당일 취소 시 환불받을 수 없다.

28. Global Citizen Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 올해 처음으로 열리는 행사이다.
② 토요일 오전부터 진행된다.
③ 특별 강연은 온라인 사전 등록이 필요하다.
④ Global Youth Zone에서 하는 활동은 참가비가 있다.
⑤ 행사 당일 시청 주차장이 개방된다.




영어 영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Metacognition simply means “thinking about thinking,” and it is one of the main distinctions between the human brain and that of other species. Our ability to stand high on a ladder above our normal thinking processes and ① evaluate why we are thinking as we are thinking is an evolutionary marvel. We have this ability ② because the most recently developed part of the human brain ― the prefrontal cortex ― enables self­reflective, abstract thought. We can think about ourselves as if we are not part of ③ ourselves. Research on primate behavior indicates that even our closest cousins, the chimpanzees, ④ lacking this ability (although they possess some self­reflective abilities, like being able to identify themselves in a mirror instead of thinking the reflection is another chimp). The ability is a double­edged sword, because while it allows us to evaluate why we are thinking
⑤ what we are thinking, it also puts us in touch with difficult existential questions that can easily become obsessions.














30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　At a time when concerns about overpopulation and famine were reaching their highest peak, Garrett Hardin did not blame these problems on human ① ignorance ― a failure to take note of dwindling per capita food supplies, for example. Instead, his explanation focused on the discrepancy between the ② interests of individual households and those of society as a whole. To understand excessive reproduction as a tragedy of the commons, bear in mind that a typical household stands to gain from bringing another child into the world ― in terms of the net contributions he or she makes to ③ household earnings, for example. But while parents can be counted on to assess how the well­being of their household is affected by additional offspring, they ④ overvalue other impacts of population growth, such as diminished per capita food supplies for other people. In other words, the costs of reproduction are largely ⑤ shared, rather than being shouldered entirely by individual households. As a result, reproduction is excessive.
* dwindling: 줄어드는

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Both the acquisition and subsequent rejection of agriculture
are becoming increasingly recognized as adaptive strategies to local conditions that may have occurred repeatedly over the past ten millennia. For example, in a recent study of the Mlabri, a modern hunter­gatherer group from northern Thailand, it was found that these people had previously been farmers, but had abandoned agriculture about 500 years ago. This raises the interesting question as to how many of the diminishing band of contemporary hunter­gatherer cultures are in fact the descendents of farmers who have only secondarily readopted hunter­gathering as a more useful lifestyle, perhaps after suffering from crop failures, dietary deficiencies, or climatic changes. Therefore, the process of what may be termed the ‘agriculturalization’ of human societies was
 	, at least on a local level. Hunter­gatherer cultures across the world, from midwestern Amerindians to !Kung in the African Kalahari, have adopted and subsequently discarded agriculture, possibly on several occasions over their history, in response to factors such as game abundance, climatic change, and so on. [3점]
* !Kung: !Kung족(族)

① not necessarily irreversible
② met with little resistance
③ essential for adaptation
④ started by pure coincidence
⑤ rarely subject to reconsideration

32. Sometimes it seems that contemporary art isn’t doing its job unless it provokes the question, ‘But is it art?’ I’m not sure the question is worth asking. It seems to me that the
line between art and not­art is never going to be a sharp one. Worse, as the various art forms ― poetry, drama, sculpture, painting, fiction, dance, etc. ― are so different, I’m not sure why we should expect to be able to come up with
 	. Art seems to be a paradigmatic example of a Wittgensteinian ‘family resemblance’ concept. Try to specify the necessary and sufficient condition for something qualifying as art and you’ll always find an exception to your criteria. If philosophy were to admit defeat in its search for some immutable essence of art, it is hardly through lack of trying. Arguably, we have very good reasons for thinking that this has been one of the biggest wild goose chases in the history of ideas. [3점]
* paradigmatic: 전형적인 ** immutable: 변치 않는

① a detailed guide to tracing the origin of art
② a novel way of perceiving reality through art
③ a single definition that can capture their variety
④ a genre that blends together diverse artistic styles
⑤ a radical idea that challenges the existing art forms




6	영어 영역


33. Rights imply obligations, but obligations need not imply
rights. The obligations of parents to our children go way beyond their legal rights. Nor do the duties of rescue need to be matched by rights: we respond to a child drowning in a pond because of her plight, not her rights. A society that succeeds in generating many obligations can be more generous and harmonious than one relying only on rights. Obligations are to rights what taxation is to public spending
― the bit that is demanding. Western electorates have mostly learned that discussion of public spending must balance its benefits against how it would be financed. Otherwise, politicians promise higher spending during an election, and the post­election excess of spending over revenue is resolved by inflation. Just as new obligations are similar to extra revenue, so the creation of rights is similar to extra spending. The rights may well be appropriate, but this can only be determined by 	.
[3점]
* electorate: 유권자

① an education about universal voting rights
② an expansion of the scope of private rights
③ a public discussion of the corresponding obligations
④ a consensus as to what constitutes a moral obligation
⑤ a reduction in the burden of complying with obligations

35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Argument is “reason giving”, trying to convince others of your side of the issue. One makes claims and backs them up. The arguer tries to get others to “recognize the rightness” of his or her beliefs or actions. ① Interpersonal argumentation, then, has a place in our everyday conflicts and negotiations.
② One of the positive features of interpersonal arguments is that they are comprised of exchanges between two people who feel  powerful  enough  to set forth reasons for their beliefs.
③ That’s why one person reveals a sense of superiority and the other ends up realizing his or her inferiority. ④ If two people are arguing, it is because they are balanced enough in power (or in their desire to reestablish a power balance) to proceed. ⑤ Lack of argument, in fact, may show that one of the parties feels so powerless that he or she avoids engaging directly with the other.










[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

36.


34. In the longer term, by bringing together enough data and
enough computing power, the data­giants could hack the deepest secrets of life, and then use this knowledge not just to make choices for us or manipulate us, but also to re­engineer organic life and to create inorganic life forms. Selling advertisements may be necessary to sustain the giants in the short term, but they often evaluate apps, products and companies according to the data they harvest rather than according to the money they generate. A popular app may lack a business model and may even lose money in the short term, but as long as it sucks data, it could be worth billions. Even if you don’t know how to cash in on the data today, it is worth having it because it might hold the key to controlling and shaping life in the future. I don’t know for certain that the data­giants explicitly think about it in   such   terms,   but  their   actions   indicate   that they
 	. [3점]

① acknowledge the need for the democratization of data
② underestimate the long­term effects of short­term losses
③ treat data as a by­product of operations, not a valuable asset
④ focus only on the return they can make on selling advertisements
⑤ value the accumulation of data more than mere dollars and cents





(A) Further roasting will turn some of the sugar into pure carbon (double bonds all round), which creates a burnt flavor and a dark­brown color. Complete roasting results in charcoal: all of the sugar has become carbon, which is black.
(B) On the whole, it is the carbon­rich molecules that are larger, so these get left behind, and within these there is a structure called a carbon­carbon double bond. This chemical structure absorbs light. In small amounts it gives the caramelizing sugar a yellow­brown color.
(C) Sugars are carbohydrates, which is to say that they are made of carbon (“carbo­”), hydrogen (“hydr­”), and oxygen (“­ate”) atoms. When heated, these long molecules disintegrate into smaller units, some of which are so small that they evaporate (which accounts for the lovely smell). [3점]

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) In fact, the overall population of orangutans has fallen by at least 80 percent in the past 75 years. It’s indicative of the difficulty of orangutan research that scientist Erik Meijaard is willing to say only that between 40,000 and 100,000 live on Borneo. Conservationists on Sumatra estimate that only 14,000 survive there.
(B) This doesn’t mean that all is well in the orangutans’ world. The higher figures come thanks to improved survey methods and the discovery of previously unknown populations, not because the actual numbers have increased.
(C) Much of this loss has been driven by habitat destruction from logging and the rapid spread of vast plantations of oil palm, the fruit of which is sold to make oil used in cooking and in many food products.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.



　Geographic expansion (which placed us in new environments) and cultural innovation both changed the selective pressures humans experienced. The payoff of many traits changed, and so did optimal life strategy. ( ① ) For example, when humans hunted big game 100,000 years ago, they relied on close­in attacks with thrusting spears. ( ② ) Such attacks were highly dangerous and physically demanding, so in those days, hunters had to be heavily muscled and have thick bones. ( ③ ) That kind of body had its disadvantages ― if nothing else, it required more food ― but on the whole, it was the best solution in that situation. ( ④ ) Once that happened, lightly built people, who were better runners and did not need as much food, became competitively superior. ( ⑤ ) A heavy build was yesterday’s solution: expensive, but no longer necessary.
* biceps: 이두박근(二頭膊筋)

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

38.



　There are several broad differences in the way that liars and truth tellers discuss events. One difference is that liars say less overall than truth tellers. If you are telling the truth, the details of what happened are obvious. ( ① ) If you are lying, it is not easy to conjure up lots of details. ( ② ) Interestingly, truth tellers talk less about their emotions than liars do. ( ③ ) As a result, that emotion feels obvious to you (and would be obvious to anyone watching you). ( ④ ) If you are lying, though, you don’t really experience that emotion, so you describe it instead. ( ⑤ ) Truth tellers also talk about themselves more than liars, because people telling the truth are more focused on their own memories than liars are (who are also thinking about how their story is being perceived by others). [3점]
* conjure up: 떠올리다






?
In a series of experiments, when the free rats witnessed their  fellow  in  a  state  of  (A)   in  a  cage,  they tended to rescue their companion, even (B) eating chocolate.

(A) (B)
① anguish	……	delaying
② anguish	……	prioritizing
③ excitement ……	prioritizing
④ boredom	……	rejecting
⑤ boredom	……	delaying




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 














(C) 
　Sure enough, no one had chosen the aisle seat by the threesome. “May I sit here?” I requested. We exchanged a few pleasantries after which I suggested that she let me hold her sleeping darling while she attended to the wiggly one. (c) Her treasure was gratefully handed over. The little boy was well­behaved, but constantly moving. If she had had to hold the baby on (d) her lap and entertain the wiggly one it would have been much more difficult.
(D) 











41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Culture Offers Us a Dual­Function Lens for Adaptation
② How the Obsession with Accuracy Harms Our Mind
③ Cultural Diversity: The Key to Human Prosperity
④ Adaptation: A Major Cause of Emotional Stress
⑤ Face Up to Reality for a Healthy Social Life!

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 앞쪽 근처 좌석을 얻기 위해 일찍 줄을 서고 싶었다.
② 터미널에서 아이들의 아버지를 쉽게 알아보았다.
③ 아이들의 어머니에게 자고 있는 아이를 안아주겠다고 했다.
④ 자신의 아이가 여행 내내 울었던 경험이 있다.
⑤ 읽으려고 계획했던 책을 비행기 안에서 다 읽었다.





2019학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. I’ll need your phone number.
② Of course. The stock prices are up.
③ No, thanks. I have enough books.
④ That’s right. Biology isn’t easy.
⑤ Sorry. I didn’t book the tickets.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure why I’m sick.
② Can I reserve a table for five?
③ How come you have a sunburn?
④ It was a pleasure meeting with you.
⑤ I’d like to make an appointment at four.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 차량 관리 방법을 설명하려고
② 이사 지침 준수를 요청하려고
③ 전기 절약 방법을 알려주려고
④ 건물 실내 소독 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 관리 사무소 위치 이전을 안내하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 개별 활동이 조별 활동보다 효율적이다.
② 교과목에 따라 효과적인 학습 방법에 차이가 있다.
③ 조별 과제를 할 때 일을 합리적으로 분담해야 한다.
④ 실수를 막기 위해 발표 자료를 미리 준비해야 한다.
⑤ 다양한 경로를 통한 자료 수집이 과제의 질을 높인다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사진작가 － 여행 가이드
② 반려동물 주인 － 수의사
③ 서커스 관람객 － 동물 조련사
④ 고고학자 － 자연사 박물관 직원
⑤ 신문 기자 － 야생 동물 구조 센터 직원



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장비 들여놓기	② 다과 준비하기
③ 현수막 주문하기	④ 운동 기구 교체하기
⑤ 문자 메시지 보내기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 기숙사에서 나가려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 과제에 집중할 수 없어서
② 시설이 마음에 들지 않아서
③ 조부모를 병간호하기 위해서
④ 이사 온 가족과 살기 위해서
⑤ 룸메이트와 사이가 좋지 않아서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $63	② $81	③ $90	④ $100	⑤ $108


10. 대화를 듣고, Tanzania Volunteer Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 기간	② 활동 내용	③ 참가비
④ 모집 인원	⑤ 지원 마감일


11. 2018 Youth History Tour에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 역사에 대한 학생들의 관심 증진이 목적이다.
② 7월 25일부터 7월 31일까지 진행된다.
③ 다섯 개의 도시를 방문할 예정이다.
④ 역사가가 안내할 것이다.
⑤ 여행자 보험료가 참가비에 포함되어 있다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 식탁을 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① I’ll go apologize to him and give my support.
② I’ll help you two make up with each other.
③ I need to teach him how to make criticism.
④ I’ll ask him to stop playing mobile games.
⑤ I should congratulate him on his victory.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① That sounds good. I’m glad you’ve overcome the disaster.
② Get over it. Don’t let the past keep you from moving forward.
③ Maybe you’re right. I should spend more time singing.
④ Don’t worry. Check why your audition was canceled.
⑤ Calm down. You’re too proud of yourself now.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Marcus가 Judy에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Marcus:   	
① Can you share your recipe if you don’t mind?
② We’ll be able to win since we’ve practiced a lot.
③ We’d better figure out who our competitors will be.
④ We need to practice harder to speed up our cooking.
⑤ How about signing up for the cooking competition with me?

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① reasons why creativity is essential to artists
② habits of famous artists to get creative ideas
③ jobs that are likely to disappear in the future
④ necessity of teaching how to appreciate artwork
⑤ relationship between job satisfaction and creativity

17. 언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
① filmmaker	② composer	③ writer
④ painter	⑤ photographer


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear staff,
　Next Monday, Nature’s Beauty Gardens will have the pleasure of hosting very important guests for the annual “Toddler Trek” event. We hope that this will be fun, educational, and most importantly safe for the toddlers. Parents and children are going to spend time enjoying outdoor activities and having a picnic lunch. It is therefore very important to check the garden for potential dangers. Managers of each department must make sure that all dangerous equipment and machinery are safely stored. Also, for the safety of our guests at this event, garden chemicals will not be used anywhere in Nature’s Beauty Gardens. Thank you for your cooperation in this safety check and for helping to make this year’s “Toddler Trek” event the best one yet.
Best regards,
Laura Alfaro, Managing Director
① 안전한 행사를 위한 준비를 지시하려고
② 노후 장비 교체 일정을 안내하려고
③ 체험 학습 행사 홍보를 부탁하려고
④ 정원 박람회 기획자를 모집하려고
⑤ 체육 대회 참가를 독려하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Ms. Baker의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? “Regularity is the key to mastery, Jean. Everything other than that is a waste of time,” stressed Ms. Baker, Jean’s piano
teacher, with a troubled look. However, Jean complained quite often about practicing and slipped out of her sessions occasionally. Concerned about Jean idling around, Ms. Baker decided to change her teaching method. “You can make your own schedule, Jean. However, I want you to help me as an assistant,” said Ms. Baker. After that, Jean practiced hard to   be a good example to the beginners and her skills improved incredibly day after day. The change in Jean was miraculous.  A smile came over Ms. Baker’s face as she listened to Jean play. Ms. Baker was convinced by Jean’s improvement that  her new teaching method was a success.
① angry     → jealous	② indifferent → grateful
③ worried  → satisfied	④ pleased → confused
⑤ alarmed → frustrated
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We say to ourselves: “There is plenty of time. I’ll manage somehow or other when the time comes for action.” We are rather proud of our ability to meet emergencies. So we do not plan and take precautions to prevent  emergencies  from arising. It is too easy to drift through school and college,  taking the traditional, conventional studies that others take, following the lines of least resistance, electing “snap courses,” and going with the crowd. It is too easy to take the attitude: “First I will get my education and develop myself, and then I will know better what I am fitted to do for a life work.” And   so we drift, driven by the winds of circumstance, tossed about by the waves of tradition and custom. Eventually, most men find they must be satisfied with “any port in a storm.” Sailors who select a port because they are driven to it have scarcely one chance in a thousand of dropping anchor in the right one.
* snap: 쉬운
① 강인한 의지를 가지고 학업을 지속해야 한다.
② 전통적 가치를 바탕으로 앞날을 계획해야 한다.
③ 타인과의 소통을 통해 경험의 폭을 넓혀야 한다.
④ 자신의 고집을 버리고 비판적 의견을 수용해야 한다.
⑤ 안일함을 버리고 미래를 준비하는 자세를 가져야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Internet entrepreneurs are creating job-search products and bringing them online regularly. Within the past  few  years, new Internet-based businesses have come online that help people find internships, complete online classes tailored to individual employer job applications, or find volunteer work that will lead to full-time employment. Job mastery will mean keeping up with the rapidly evolving tools available on the Internet. It should be noted,  though, that no development in  the Internet job age has reduced the importance of the most basic job search skill: self-knowledge. Even in the  Internet age, the job search starts with identifying individual job skills, sector interests, and preferred workplace environment and interests. Richard Bolles’ best selling job search book, first published in 1970, had as its central theme the self-inventory  of skills and workplace preferences. This self-inventory continues to be the starting point for any job search today no matter   what the Internet technology involved.
* entrepreneur: 사업가 ** inventory: 목록
① 구직 정보 검색 도구가 빠르게 발전하고 있다.
② 인터넷 관련 일자리 창출을 위한 기업의 투자가 시급하다.
③ 인터넷을 활용한 구직에서도 자신에 대한 이해가 중요하다.
④ 업무 효율을 높이려면 인터넷 작업 환경 개선이 필요하다.
⑤ 인터넷을 통한 직업 교육이 확산되는 추세이다.


22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The term “biological control” has been used, at times, in a broad context to cover a full spectrum of biological organisms and biologically based products. This has been spectacularly successful in many instances, with a number of pest problems permanently resolved by importation and successful establishment of natural enemies. These importation successes have been limited largely to certain types of ecosystems and/or pest situations such as introduced pests in perennial ecosystems.  On the other hand, this approach has met with limited success for major pests of row crops or other ephemeral systems. In these situations, the problem is often not the lack of effective natural enemies but management practices and a lack of concerted research on factors that determine the success or failure of importation attempts in the specific agro-ecosystem setting. Thus, importation programs, to date, are largely a matter of trial and error based on experience of the individual specialists involved.
* perennial: 다년생의 ** ephemeral: 단명하는
① difficulties in identifying major pests in agriculture
② benefits of introducing natural enemies into ecosystems
③ ways to apply biological control strategies to agriculture
④ side effects from pest elimination through biological control
⑤ reasons for partial success of importation in biological control
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　According to the individualist form of rhetoric about science, still much used for certain purposes, discoveries are made in laboratories. They are the product of inspired patience, of skilled hands and an inquiring but unbiased mind. Moreover, they speak for themselves, or at least they speak too powerfully and too insistently for prejudiced humans to silence them. It would be wrong to suppose that such beliefs are not sincerely held, yet almost nobody thinks they can provide a basis for action in public contexts. Any scientist who announces a so-called discovery at a press conference without first permitting expert reviewers to examine his or her claims is automatically castigated as a publicity seeker. The norms of scientific communication presuppose that nature does not speak unambiguously, and that knowledge isn’t knowledge unless it has been authorized by disciplinary specialists. A scientific truth has little standing until it becomes a collective product. What happens in somebody’s laboratory is only one stage in its construction.
* rhetoric: 수사(학) ** castigate: 혹평하다
① Path to Scientific Truth: Scientific Community’s Approval
② The Prime Rule of Science: First Means Best
③ The Lonely Genius Drives Scientific Discoveries
④ Scientific Discoveries Speak for Themselves!
⑤ Social Prejudice Presents Obstacles to Scientific Research

24. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?









　The table above displays the life expectancy at birth in 2030 for five selected countries. ① In each of the five selected countries, it is predicted that the life expectancy of women will be higher than that of men. ② In the case of women, life expectancy in the Republic of Korea is expected to be the highest among the five countries, followed by that in Austria.
③ As for men, the Republic of Korea and Singapore will rank the first and the second highest, respectively, in life  expectancy in the five countries. ④ Both Slovakian women and men will have the lowest life expectancy by gender among the five countries, with 82.92 and 76.98 years, respectively.
⑤ Among the five countries, the largest difference in life expectancy between women and men is 6.75 years,  predicted to be found in the Republic of Korea, and the smallest difference is 3.46 years, in Sweden.


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Richard Burton에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Richard Burton was a highly regarded Welsh actor of stage and screen. He was born in 1925 in South Wales, the twelfth child of a poor miner. Burton was the first member of his
family to go to secondary school. Then, he attended Oxford University and later joined the British air force during wartime. After leaving the military in 1947, he made his film debut in 1949, in The Last Days of Dolwyn. Richard Burton went on to become a praised actor of stage and screen, who was nominated for an Academy Award seven times, but never won an Oscar. It is well-known that he had a powerful voice overwhelming the camera, the microphone, and all the intimacy of film acting. His final film was an adaptation of George Orwell’s famous novel, 1984.
① South Wales에서 가난한 광부의 12번째 아이로 태어났다.
② 전쟁 기간 중 영국 공군에 입대했다.
③ 인정받는 연기자가 되어, Oscar상을 7번 수상했다.
④ 힘 있는 목소리를 가졌던 것으로 잘 알려져 있다.
⑤ 마지막 영화는 George Orwell의 소설을 각색한 작품이었다.

26. KSFF International Exchange Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

KSFF International Exchange Program
　Are you interested in participating in an international exchange program? The Korea-Singapore Friendship Foundation (KSFF) will send high
school students to 6 schools in Singapore. This opportunity will be great for developing a global perspective and lifelong memories.
OPPORTUNITY and DATES
?Each school will host 7 to 10 high school students.
?Two weeks: from September 3, 2018, to September 16, 2018
ACTIVITIES
?Classroom participation and extra-curricular activities
?Visiting tourist sites
ACCOMMODATIONS
?KSFF will arrange for  participants  to  stay with local families.
More information is available at www.ksffexchange.net. Please note: The application must be completed on our website by June 9, 2018.

① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 2018년 9월 16일부터 2주간 운영된다.
③ 관광지 방문 활동을 포함한다.
④ KSFF가 참가자를 위해 현지 가정 체류를 주선한다.
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 신청을 완료해야 한다.
27. 
2018 Tree Distribution Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

2018 Tree Distribution Event
　The Greenville Community Center is pleased to offer free trees through our annual Tree Distribution Event. Distribution is limited to two trees per household due to the limited number of available trees.
?Call the community center at 304-315-7777 by Friday, June 15, 2018, to request your free trees.
?Requests are accepted by phone only.
?Pick-up  instructions  will  be  sent  by  the  end  of  June 2018 via text message.
?The pick-up day for trees will be a Saturday, in either July or August 2018 (dependent on weather conditions).
You can get more information about the age and size of the trees on our website (www.treegreenville.org).

① 할인된 가격으로 나무를 판매한다.
② 가구당 한 그루의 나무만 분양해 준다.
③ 이메일로만 신청을 받는다.
④ 나무를 받아가는 방법을 7월 말에 문자 메시지로 보낸다.
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 나무의 나이 및 크기 정보를 제공한다.









28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Humans are so averse to feeling that they’re being cheated
① that they often respond in ways that seemingly make little sense. Behavioral economists ― the economists who actually study ② what people do as opposed to the kind who simply assume the human mind works like a calculator ― have shown again and again that people reject unfair offers even if
③ it costs them money to do so. The typical experiment uses a task called the ultimatum game. It’s pretty straightforward. One person in a pair is given some money ― say $10. She then has the opportunity to offer some amount of it to her partner. The partner only has two options. He can take what’s offered or ④ refused to take anything. There’s no room for negotiation; that’s why it’s called the ultimatum game. What typically happens? Many people offer an equal split to the partner, ⑤ leaving both individuals happy and willing to trust each other in the future.
* averse to: ~을 싫어하는 ** ultimatum: 최후통첩

이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글에서 밑줄 친 None이 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Here’s an interesting thought. If glaciers started re-forming, they have a great deal more water now to draw on ― Hudson Bay, the Great Lakes, the hundreds of thousands of lakes of Canada, none of which existed to fuel the last ice sheet ― so they would grow very much quicker. And if they did start to advance again, what exactly would we do? Blast them with TNT or maybe nuclear missiles? Well, doubtless we would, but consider this. In 1964, the largest earthquake ever recorded in North America rocked Alaska with 200,000 megatons of concentrated might, the equivalent of 2,000 nuclear bombs. Almost 3,000 miles away in Texas, water sloshed out of swimming pools. A street in Anchorage fell twenty feet. The quake devastated 24,000 square miles of wilderness, much of it glaciated. And what effect did all this might have on Alaska’s glaciers? None.
* slosh: 철벅철벅 튀다 ** devastate: 황폐시키다
① It would be of no use to try to destroy glaciers.
② The melting glaciers would drive the rise of the sea level.
③ The Alaskan wilderness would not be harmed by glaciers.
④ Re-forming glaciers would not spread over North America.
⑤ The causes of glacier re-formation would not include  quakes.











30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　John was once in the office of a manager, Michael, when the phone rang. Immediately, Michael bellowed, “That disgusting phone never stops ringing.” ① He then proceeded to pick it up and engage in a fifteen-minute conversation while John  waited. When ② he finally hung up, he looked exhausted and frustrated. He apologized as the phone rang once again. He later confessed that he was having a great deal of trouble completing his tasks because of the volume of calls he was responding to. At some point John asked him, “Have you ever considered having a certain period of time when ③ you  simply don’t answer the phone?” Michael said, “As a matter of fact, no,” looking at ④ him with a puzzled look. It turned out that this simple suggestion helped Michael not only to relax, but to get more work done as well. Like many people, ⑤ he didn’t need hours of uninterrupted time, but he did need  some!
* bellow: 고함치다

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에   들어갈   말로  가장  적절한   것을 고르시오.
31. Although prices in most retail outlets are set by the retailer, this does not mean that these prices 	. On any particular day we find that all products have a specific price ticket on them. However, this price may be different from day to day or week to week. The price that the farmer gets from the wholesaler is much more flexible from day to day than the price that the retailer charges consumers. If, for example, bad weather leads to a poor potato crop, then the price that supermarkets have to pay to their wholesalers for potatoes will go up and this will be reflected in the prices they mark on potatoes in their stores. Thus, these prices do reflect the interaction of demand and supply in the wider marketplace for
potatoes. Although they do not change in the supermarket from hour to hour to reflect local variations in demand and supply, they do change over time to reflect the underlying conditions  of the overall production of and demand for the goods in question. [3점]
① reflect the principle of demand and supply
② may not change from hour to hour
③ go up due to bad weather
④ do not adjust to market forces over time
⑤ can be changed by the farmer’s active role





32. An individual characteristic that moderates the relationship with behavior is self-efficacy, or a judgment of one’s capability to accomplish a certain level of performance. People who have a high sense of self-efficacy tend to pursue challenging goals that may be outside the reach of the average person. People with a strong sense of self-efficacy, therefore, may be more willing to step outside the culturally prescribed behaviors to attempt tasks or goals for which success is viewed as improbable by the majority of social actors in a setting. For these individuals,
 	. For example, Australians tend to endorse the “Tall Poppy Syndrome.” This saying suggests that any “poppy” that outgrows the others  in a field will get “cut down;” in other words, any overachiever will eventually fail. Interviews and observations suggest that it is the high self-efficacy Australians who step outside this culturally prescribed behavior to actually achieve beyond average. [3점]
* self-efficacy: 자기 효능감 ** endorse: 지지하다
① self-efficacy is not easy to define
② culture will have little or no impact on behavior
③ setting a goal is important before starting a task
④ high self-efficacy is a typical quality of Australians
⑤ judging the reaction from the community will be hard


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Theorists of the novel commonly define the genre as a biographical form that came to prominence in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries   	                                                             as a replacement for traditional sources of cultural authority. The novel, Georg Luk?cs argues, “seeks, by giving form, to uncover and construct the concealed totality of life” in the interiorized life story of its heroes. The typical plot of the novel is the protagonist’s quest for authority within, therefore, when that authority can no longer be discovered outside. By this accounting, there are no objective goals in novels, only the subjective goal of seeking the law that is necessarily created by the individual. The distinctions between crime and heroism,
therefore, or between madness and wisdom, become purely subjective ones in a novel, judged by the quality or complexity of the individual’s consciousness. [3점]
① to establish the individual character
② to cast doubt on the identity of a criminal
③ to highlight the complex structure of social consciousness
④ to make the objective distinction between crime and heroism
⑤ to develop the inner self of a hero into a collective wisdom








34. Rules can be thought of as formal types of  game  cues. They tell us the structure of the test, that is, what should be accomplished and how we should accomplish it. In this sense,
 	. Only within the rules of the game of, say, basketball or baseball do the activities of jump shooting and fielding ground balls make sense and take on value. It is precisely the artificiality created by the rules, the distinctive problem to be solved, that gives sport its special meaning. That is why getting a basketball through a hoop while not using a ladder or pitching a baseball across home plate while standing a certain distance away becomes an important human project. It appears that respecting the rules not only preserves sport but also makes room for the creation of excellence and the emergence of meaning. Engaging in acts that would be considered inconsequential in ordinary life also liberates us a bit, making it possible to explore our capabilities in a protected environment. [3점]
* inconsequential: 중요하지 않은
① rules prevent sports from developing a special meaning
② rules create a problem that is artificial yet intelligible
③ game structures can apply to other areas
④ sports become similar to real life due to rules
⑤ game cues are provided by player and spectator interaction
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　While being an introvert comes with its challenges, it definitely has its advantages as well. For example, an introvert is far less likely to make a mistake in  a social situation, such  as inadvertently insulting another person whose opinion is not agreeable. ① An introvert would enjoy reflecting on their thoughts, and thus would be far less likely to suffer from boredom without outside stimulation. ② The only risk  that you will face as an introvert is that people who do not know you may think that you are aloof or that you think you are better than them. ③ If you learn how to open up just a little bit with your opinions and thoughts, you will be able to thrive in both worlds. ④ An introvert may prefer online to in-person communication, as you do when feeling temporarily uncertain with your relationships. ⑤ You can then stay true to your personality without appearing to be antisocial.
* inadvertently: 무심코 ** aloof: 냉담한






[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에  이어질  글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　A carbon sink is a natural feature that absorbs or stores more carbon than it releases.

(A) Carbon sinks have been able to absorb about half of this excess CO2, and the world’s oceans have done the major part of that job. They absorb about one-fourth of humans’ industrial carbon emissions, doing half the work of all Earth’s carbon sinks combined.
(B) Its mass of plants and other organic material absorb and store tons of carbon. However, the planet’s major carbon sink is its oceans. Since the Industrial Revolution began   in the eighteenth century, CO2 released during industrial processes has greatly increased the proportion of carbon  in the atmosphere.
(C) The value of carbon sinks is that they can help create equilibrium in the atmosphere by removing excess CO2. One example of a carbon sink is a large forest.
* equilibrium: 평형 상태
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.





(A) Technological advances have led to a dramatic reduction in the cost of processing and transmitting  information. The result is an explosion of information, and that has produced a “paradox of plenty.” Plentiful information leads to scarcity of attention.
(B) In such circumstances, diplomacy aimed at public opinion can become as important to outcomes as traditional classified diplomatic communications among leaders. Information creates power, and today a much larger part of the world’s population has access to that power.
(C) When people are overwhelmed with the volume of information confronting them, they have difficulty knowing what to focus on. Attention, rather than information, becomes the scarce resource, and those who can distinguish valuable information from background clutter gain power. [3점]
* clutter: 혼란
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

There is a considerable difference as to whether people watch a film about the Himalayas on television and become excited by the ‘untouched nature’ of the majestic mountain peaks, or whether they get up and go on a trek to Nepal.

　Tourism takes place simultaneously in the realm of the imagination and that of the physical world. In contrast to literature or film, it leads to ‘real’, tangible worlds, while nevertheless remaining tied to the sphere of fantasies, dreams, wishes ― and myth. It thereby allows the ritual enactment of mythological ideas. ( ① ) Even in the latter case, they remain, at least partly, in an imaginary world. ( ② ) They experience moments that they have already seen at home in books, brochures and films. ( ③ ) Their notions of untouched nature and friendly, innocent indigenous people will probably be confirmed. ( ④ ) But now this confirmation is anchored in a physical experience. ( ⑤ ) The myth is thus transmitted in a much more powerful way than by television, movies or books.
* indigenous: 토착의
　
Humans can tell lies with their faces. Although some are specifically trained to detect lies from facial expressions, the average person is often misled into believing false and manipulated facial emotions. One reason for this is that we are “two-faced.” By this I mean that we have two different neural systems that manipulate our facial muscles. ( ① ) One neural system is under voluntary control and the other works under involuntary control. ( ② ) There are reported cases of individuals who have damaged the neural system that controls voluntary expressions. ( ③ ) They still have facial expressions, but are incapable of producing deceitful ones. ( ④ ) The emotion that you see is the emotion they are feeling, since they have lost the needed voluntary control to produce false facial expressions. ( ⑤ ) These people have injured the system that controls their involuntary expressions, so that the only changes in their demeanor you will see are actually willed expressions.
* demeanor: 태도, 표정
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





(A) (B)
① essential …… prior
② practical  …… detailed
③ useless	…… relevant
④ practical …… independent
⑤ essential …… unbiased


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

when Rita was learning to swim. Princess had a fear of water that was so extreme that she couldn’t even touch the water.
* Boxer: 복서(개의 한 품종)


(B) 
　Upon hearing Rita’s cry, her mother rushed to the railing, shouting for help, from the entrance of the store a hundred feet or so away. Princess was looking at the water and trembling in fear. (b) She stood there staring at the water ― the one thing that had nearly taken her life. Her love for Rita overpowered her fear and she leapt out through the same open space in the railing and plunged into the water. Once in the water, Princess quickly found Rita and slowly dragged her to the shore to her grateful mother.

(C) 
　Princess’ fears stemmed from her puppyhood when (c) she almost drowned twice. These early traumas made water the only thing that Princess truly feared. When (d) she came  close to a body of water, she would try to pull back and seemed emotionally distressed. Would she ever be able to overcome this fear? She had a chance one late  afternoon when Rita’s mother took them to a shopping mall.
(D) 



41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Increasing the Gap Between Composers and Listeners
② Within or Beyond Classical Music Heritage
③ Classical Music: Healing the World
④ Lost in the Past: The End of Masterpieces
⑤ Classical Composition in the Nineteenth Century

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Princess, a solid Boxer, had been given to Rita when she was ten weeks old, and Rita immediately bonded with (a) her, petting her, feeding her, teaching her basic commands, and letting her sleep on Rita’s bed. The two were always together and within arm’s reach. The only time they were apart was
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Rita는 수영을 배울 때를 제외하고 Princess와 항상 함께했다.
② Princess가 사고를 당하자 Rita의 어머니는 도움을 요청했다.
③ Princess는 Rita에 대한 사랑으로 물에 대한 두려움을 극복했다.
④ Rita의 어머니는 Rita와 Princess를 쇼핑몰에 데려갔다.
⑤ Rita와 Princess는 호숫가 산책로에서 놀고 있었다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2019학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Of course! We have to buy some toys.
② Okay. We’ll reschedule the charity bazaar.
③ Too bad. We aren’t gathering donations now.
④ Why not? Your donation will be a great help.
⑤ Sorry. My toys have already been given away.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① I’m not sure. Let me check if it does.
② I agree. Yoga helps you stay flexible.
③ Sorry. I’m not interested in sports.
④ No, thanks. Your gym is too far.
⑤ Right. Yoga is hard to learn.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 졸음운전 예방법을 소개하려고
② 자동차 안전기준 강화를 촉구하려고
③ 올바른 의약품 보관법을 설명하려고
④ 장시간 운전 시 휴식의 필요성을 강조하려고
⑤ 약 복용 후의 운전에 대해 주의를 당부하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 재활용 대상 품목과 방법을 늘려야 한다.
② 환경보호를 위해 작은 일이라도 실천해야 한다.
③ 무분별한 일회용품 사용이 환경오염의 주범이다.
④ 환경오염의 심각성에 대한 인식 교육이 필요하다.
⑤ 많은 사람이 환경운동에 조직적으로 참여해야 한다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사진사 - 학생	② 건축 설계사 - 교장
③ 인쇄소 직원 - 작가	④ 편집 디자이너 - 교사
⑤ 인테리어 디자이너 - 집주인


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 텐트 대여하기	② 캠핑장 답사하기
③ 축구장 예약하기	④ 회의 일정 공지하기
⑤ 회원들에게 전화하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 Lakeside Musical Festival에 참가할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.

① 가족 여행을 가야 해서
② 어울리는 배역이 없어서
③ 연습 일정이 맞지 않아서
④ 다른 공연에 참가해야 해서
⑤ 할아버지 병간호를 해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36	② $45	③ $72	④ $80	⑤ $90

10. 대화를 듣고, Monet Tour에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 이동 수단	② 소요 시간	③ 집합 장소
④ 기념품	⑤ 참가비

11. Green Farm’s Fun Day에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.

① 모든 연령대가 참가할 수 있다.
② 일요일 오전 10시에 시작한다.
③ 참가자는 동물에게 직접 먹이를 줄 수 있다.
④ 점심이 무료로 제공된다.
⑤ 12세 이하 어린이의 참가비는 10달러이다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구매할 제품을 고르시오.
Air Fryers


①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Sure. I’ll try to enjoy the process of studying itself.
② Yes, I’m glad the math exam was rescheduled.
③ Well, I’d better prepare for the exam sooner.
④ Right. I shouldn’t forget about my final goal.
⑤ Sorry. I’m not a big fan of solving puzzles.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Great! I’ll look up which pet shop to visit.
② Exactly! That’s why we shouldn’t abandon pets.
③ Well, we should think twice before adopting a cat.
④ Really? Let’s ask her if we can have one of them.
⑤ Thanks. My kids will be happy if you give us a cat.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Sarah가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Sarah:  	
① Why don’t you ask him to be your music tutor?
② I suggest you reconsider signing up for tutoring.
③ I think you can start by learning basic vocabulary.
④ Let’s look for someone who can help Minsu with math.
⑤ Why not use songs to encourage him to learn English words?

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① food traditions during the holidays
② holiday crafts across the globe
③ origins of major holidays
④ traditional ways to preserve foods
⑤ foods with a high number of calories

17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① United Kingdom	② Peru	③ Greece
④ Sweden	⑤ Cuba


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 숙소 예약을 확인하려고
② 여행 일정 변경을 요청하려고
③ 수영장 이용 방법을 문의하려고
④ 만족스러운 여행 상품에 대해 감사하려고
⑤ 수영장을 이용하지 못한 것을 불평하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　My father’s face was stern as he watched me slowly climb down from the kitchen roof. “Explain yourself, son.” His commanding voice was so full of authority it made me stand up straight like a tin soldier. What could I say in my own defence? I replied, “We don’t have a Christmas tree. All I wanted was to make one. I am truly sorry, Father.” My heart was racing so fast I could barely hear myself talking. I waited for my father to calculate the severity of punishment. And then he looked away for a moment, and I realized his stern look had melted from his face, and there was a smile on his lips. He came closer. I relaxed as he stroked my head and affectionately said, “Well done, my boy. Well done!”

① bored→excited② nervous	→ relieved③ indifferent→grateful④ comforted → confused⑤ irritated→sympathetic
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　During a time of stress or change, as parents, we want to protect our children. This is a normal parental instinct, and it’s an appropriate behavior. But it’s during this time of protection that we, without realizing it, take power away from our children. It helps to give your child practice in making decisions. A good place to start is to ask questions to help them decide a course of action to take so they feel they did everything they could to prepare. Regrettably, at times, the plan may not go as intended, but you have to let your child experience the natural consequences and learn from these little mistakes. This is so difficult to do because we never want to see our children suffer, but these little learning experiences actually make them feel more empowered.
① 자녀가 자신의 주장을 펼칠 때 진지하게 경청하라.
② 자녀가 직접 결정을 내리고 그 결과로부터 배우게 하라.
③ 자녀의 지적 호기심을 유발할 수 있는 환경을 조성하라.
④ 실패를 겪은 자녀에게 잘못을 지적하기에 앞서 위로하라.
⑤ 자녀를 훈계할 때 어떤 행동이 잘못인지 명확히 설명하라.




영어 영역	3

21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 If you were pushing yourself appropriately and have evaluated yourself rigorously, then you will have identified errors that you made. A critical part of self­evaluation is deciding what caused the errors. Average performers believe their errors were caused by factors outside their control: My opponent got lucky; the task was too hard; I just don’t have any natural ability for this. Top performers, by contrast, believe they are responsible for their errors. Note that this is not just a difference of personality or attitude. The best performers have set highly specific, technique­based goals and strategies for themselves; they have thought through exactly how they intend to achieve what they want. So when something doesn’t work, they can relate the failure to specific elements of their performance that may have misfired. Research on champion golfers, for example, has uncovered precisely this pattern. They’re much less likely than average golfers to blame their problems on the weather, the course, or chance factors. Instead they focus relentlessly on their own performance.
① 잘못에 대한 과도한 자책은 성취욕을 저하할 수 있다.
② 성취 목표가 지나치게 높으면 실수를 범할 가능성이 커진다.
③ 타인의 지적에 대한 수용적 태도는 실수를 줄이는 데 기여한다.
④ 한 번의 실수를 근거로 사람을 판단하는 것은 바람직하지 않다.
⑤ 높은 성취를 보이는 사람들은 잘못의 원인을 자신에게서 찾는다.







22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　An object at rest tends to stay at rest. To change is to learn something new, to think differently, to act differently, and to move in a new direction. Great ideas, great people, and great projects have fallen victim to resistance to change. Resistance to change means people are working hard to protect the status quo. When people who resist are ignored or pushed aside, they become formidable opposition. In order to succeed at change, resistance and the people who resist should be viewed differently. Here’s why: Resistance is a natural part of the change process and exists in many forms. People resist for different reasons and in different ways. To master change, you must first understand the personal, structural, and physiological reasons people resist. When you understand resistance, you can learn to expect it and even use it to your advantage. Understanding and managing resistance is critical when you are promoting change.
* status quo: 현재 상태 ** formidable: 감당할 수 없는
① misunderstanding about the nature of organizational change
② importance of appreciating resistance for successful change
③ ways people who resist contribute to social development
④ changes of people’s attitudes toward social innovation
⑤ risks that can be caused by ignoring resistance
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Taste is crucial to our survival. In a way, one might think of it as the most important of our senses ― helping us to distinguish between that which is nutritious and that which may be poisonous. And yet, on closer inspection, it turns out not to be so important, at least not in terms of perception. While more than half of the brain is involved in processing what we see, only something like 1% of the cerebral cortex is directly involved in taste perception. The reason for this is that our brains pick up on the statistical regularities of the environment, and so we learn to predict the likely taste and nutritional properties of potential foodstuffs on the basis of other sensory cues, such as color and smell. This allows us to assess the likely consequences of ingesting a whole host of different foods without necessarily having to stick them into our mouths first in order to determine what they taste like.
* cerebral cortex: 대뇌 피질 ** ingest: 섭취하다
① Good Looking Foods Taste Good As Well!
② Taste: The Most Critical Sense for Survival
③ Color & Smell: The Fake Cues for Nutrition
④ How We Perceive Foods Without Tasting Them
⑤ All of Our Senses Help Us Understand Our Surroundings


24. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Worldwide Wearable Technology Retail Market Value
(USD, Millions)

Year
Type20142015201620172018Smart Glasses1,2005,40011,76019,89031,070Smart Watches2,86411,12523,06739,90362,223Fitness &
Activity Trackers2,0992,5343,2474,3365,722Heart Rate Monitors1,8602,0122,1402,2172,227Total8,02321,07240,21566,347101,242· Note: Detail may not add to total shown because of rounding.
 The table above shows the worldwide wearable technology retail market value from 2014 to 2018. ① The retail market value of each type of technology increased during the five years, and the total wearable technology retail market value increased more than ten times from 2014 to 2018. ② Of the four types of wearable technology listed, the retail market value of Smart Glasses was the smallest in 2014, but it increased more than four times in 2015. ③ While the retail market value of Smart Watches increased the most between 2014 and 2018, that of Heart Rate Monitors increased the least. ④ The retail market value of Fitness & Activity Trackers was the second largest in 2014, and it was the second smallest every year after that. ⑤ Though the retail market value of Smart Watches was the largest in 2018, it was less than half the total retail market value of wearable technology for that year.




4	영어 영역


25. Charles Grant Allen에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Charles Grant Allen was born near Kingston, Ontario, Canada. His father was a minister and his mother the daughter of a French nobleman. Allen was educated at home as a child. After his family returned to Europe, he attended King Edward’s School in Birmingham, England. He got married in 1868 and graduated from Oxford University three years later. His wife’s health was frail, and Allen held various teaching positions to help pay for her medical care. He was a professor of logic at Queens College in Jamaica for several years, then in 1876 returned to England and began writing for the London Daily  News.     During the 1880s Allen began publishing his fiction such as Strange    Stories,                                                      The Devil’s Die, and his best­known work, The Woman Who Did. A versatile writer, Allen also published books of poetry, philosophical essays, and popular science.
* versatile: 다재다능한

27. 2019 Summer Junior Chef Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 어렸을 때 집에서 교육을 받았다.
② 결혼하고 3년 후에 대학을 졸업했다.
③ 아내의 의료비를 대기 위해 가르치는 일을 했다.
④ 1876년에 영국을 떠나 자메이카에서 논리학을 가르쳤다.
⑤ 1880년대에 자신의 소설을 출판하기 시작했다.


26. Portable Photo Printer에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 앱 없이도 스마트폰에 있는 사진을 인쇄할 수 있다.
② 완전히 충전되면 사진을 연속 30장까지 인쇄할 수 있다.
③ 10MB보다 작은 용량의 사진 파일을 인쇄할 수 있다.
④ 추운 날씨에 작동 시 인쇄가 안 될 수 있다.
⑤ 용지가 걸리면 전원을 끄고 수동으로 빼내야 한다.





① 14세 미만의 어린이는 참가할 수 없다.
② 등록비는 점심 값을 포함하지 않는다.
③ 7월 중순에 4일간 진행된다.
④ 캠프 기간 중 매일 다른 강사가 가르친다.
⑤ 요리책 만들기 활동은 수요일과 목요일에 있다.









28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The idea that hypnosis can put the brain into a special state, ① in which the powers of memory are dramatically greater than normal, reflects a belief in a form of easily unlocked potential. But it is false. People under hypnosis generate more “memories” than they ② do in a normal state, but these recollections are as likely to be false as true. Hypnosis leads them to come up with more information, but not necessarily more accurate information. In fact, it might actually be people’s beliefs in the power of hypnosis that ③ leads them to recall more things: If people believe that they should have better memory under hypnosis, they will try harder to retrieve more memories when hypnotized. Unfortunately, there’s no way to know
④ whether the memories hypnotized people retrieve are true or not ? unless of course we know exactly what the person should be able to remember. But if we ⑤ knew that, then we’d have no need to use hypnosis in the first place!
* hypnosis: 최면




영어 영역	5

29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　One factor contributing to students’ difficulty in making accurate judgments of their own knowledge is hindsight bias: the tendency to assume once something happens that one knew all along that it was going to happen. When students receive feedback suggesting that their knowledge is incomplete, such as getting an exam item (A) incorrect / right , they may respond by telling themselves that they actually did know the information. Although they do not have a strong grasp of the material, they feel as if they do because they recognize something about the item content. Looking back, once they know the answer, the solution seems obvious. This feeling of (B) familiarity / novelty can lead students to have an exaggerated sense of what they know. Hindsight bias therefore (C) diminishes / reinforces the feeling that their failure was due to the nature of the assessment rather than the nature of their knowledge ― which makes it more difficult for them to learn from feedback.
(A) (B)	(C)
① incorrect	……	familiarity	……	diminishes
② incorrect	……	novelty	……	diminishes
③ incorrect	……	familiarity	……	reinforces
④ right	……	novelty	……	reinforces
⑤ right	……	familiarity	……	diminishes






30. 밑줄 친 a premature baby in an incubator가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Think of the world as a premature baby in an incubator. The baby’s health status is extremely bad and her breathing, heart rate, and other important signs are tracked constantly so that changes for better or worse can quickly be seen. After a week, she is getting a lot better. On all the main measures, she is improving, but she still has to stay in the incubator because her health is still critical. Does it make sense to say that the infant’s situation is improving? Yes. Absolutely. Does it make sense to say it is bad? Yes. Absolutely. Does saying “things are improving” imply that everything is fine, and we should all relax and not worry? No, not at all. Is it helpful to have to choose between bad and improving? Definitely not. It’s both. That is how we must think about the current state of the world.
① having signs of getting better, but still not in good condition
② being in a dangerous situation with no hope to improve
③ lacking essential competence, not functioning properly
④ being expected to grow up and face a bright future
⑤ happening too early when no one is ready for it

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. A term like social drinker was itself what we might call  “socially constructed.” When a social drinker was caught driving drunk, it was seen as a single instance of bad judgment in an otherwise exemplary life, but this was rarely the case. Experts liked to point out that persons caught driving drunk for the first time had probably done so dozens
of times before without incident. The language chosen to characterize these particular individuals, however, reflected the 	way that society viewed them. The same could be said for the word accident, which was the common term used to describe automobile crashes well into the 1980s. An accident implied an unfortunate act of God, not something that could ― or should ― be prevented.
① forgiving	② objective	③ degrading
④ unwelcome	⑤ praiseworthy











32. Interconnectivity doesn’t mean inclusivity. On the contrary, it may produce a Balkanization of views that harshens political discourse and supports or hardens extremist views. There is little sign that the Internet or social media 	; in some ways they are set up to insulate us from dissent or
challenge, for example, by offering to personalize news feeds. It used to take some effort to find Holocaust­denying pseudohistory; now it’s one click away. Just as information technologies may serve to amplify existing prejudices and misconceptions, so they amplify inequality. In business and trade, in arts and entertainment and fame, markets have become ever more inclined toward “winner takes all.” This, psychological studies show, is precisely what to expect from rating systems in which you can easily see what choices others are making. [3점]
* Balkanization: (국가·지역 등의) 분열, 발칸화
** pseudohistory: 가짜 역사, 유사역사학
① facilitates political or regional conflicts
② encourages broadmindedness and debate
③ supports creativity and innovative thinking
④ promotes a sense of privacy and security
⑤ spreads new ideas and trends quickly





6	영어 영역


33. Big corporations feel very evil to us now, the natural targets of blame for low­paying jobs, environmental abuse and sickening ingredients. But Adam Smith knew there was an unexpected, and more important, element responsible for these ills: our taste. Collectively, it is we, the consumers, who opt for certain kinds of ease and excitement over others. And once that basic fact is in place, everything else follows it. It’s not companies that primarily degrade the world. It is our appetites, which they merely serve.  As a result,  the reform of capitalism  entirely
depends on an odd­sounding, but critical task: the education of the consumer. We need to be taught to want better quality things and pay a proper price for them, one that reflects the true burden on workers and the environment. A good capitalist society doesn’t therefore just offer customers choice, it also spends a considerable part of its energies educating people about how to exercise this choice in judicious ways. Capitalism needs to be saved by 	. [3점]
* judicious: 분별력 있는

① elevating the quality of demand
② correcting corporations’ wrongdoings
③ slowing the speed of economic growth
④ reforming the way we distribute wealth
⑤ offering consumers a wider range of goods

35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Geography greatly restricted colonial communications. ① Even the simplest postal network requires some sort of transportation system, but such was the difficulty of simply getting from point A to point B, especially overland, that it was easier for residents of Massachusetts and the Carolinas to sail to Great Britain than to visit each other. ② Whenever possible, colonists and their communiqu?s floated to their destinations on the boats and rafts that plied the rivers and the winding coast. ③ Otherwise, they traveled by foot or horseback along trails unfit for wheeled vehicles that had been created by game animals and the Indians who hunted them. ④ Since wheels were made of wood, they needed frequent repairs, which made wheel makers important tradesmen in colonial towns. ⑤ In a vicious circle, the awful roads interrupted intercolonial communications, which further developed the provinces’ sense of isolation and autonomy, only worsening the chances of unified transportation and postal networks.
* communiqu?: 공식 발표 ** ply: 다니다, 왕복하다



[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.


34. The author is superficially understood to be the creative, and individual, source of a written text. The idea that there is a unique creator of a text, and that the task of reading is, in consequence, a more or less passive process of recovering his or her intentions and meanings, has been variously challenged. Nineteenth­century hermeneuticians, notably Wilhelm Dilthey, challenged the assumption that the author had any privileged insight into the meaning of his or her text by critically examining the active process entailed in  reading,  and  thus  the  need  to  construct  rather than
merely  to  recover  meaning  from  a  text.  In  effect, the
author’s	self­understandings	are	exposed	as	merely
 	. In aesthetics, criticism of the ‘intentional fallacy’ holds that interpretation of a work of art  cannot claim to be definitive  or authoritative by having recovered the author’s intentions. Challenging the author’s status thereby pushes aesthetic reflection towards the intrinsic qualities of the artwork or text, and at the extreme undermines the possibility of there being a single, definitive or correct reading. [3점]
* hermeneutician: 해석학자

① a reflection of the prevailing literary trends
② something that leaves no room for alternative ideas
③ an insufficient explanation that misleads the readers
④ one more interpretation of the text among many others
⑤ another example of authors caring less about being original

36.

(A) They grew up in environments with severe poverty, alcohol abuse, or mental illness, and two out of three developed serious problems by adolescence and adulthood. Yet despite these extreme hardships, a third of the kids matured into “competent, confident, and caring young adults” with no record of delinquency or mental health problems.
(B) We can start by helping children develop four core beliefs: they have some control over their lives; they can learn from failure; they matter as human beings; and they have real strengths to rely on and share. These four beliefs have a real impact on kids. One study tracked hundreds of at­risk children for three decades.
(C) These resilient children shared something: they felt a strong sense of control over their lives. They saw themselves as the masters of their own fate and viewed negative events not as threats but as challenges and even opportunities.
* resilience: 회복탄력성 ** delinquency: 범죄
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) Thus, by changing the “rules” of the game, researchers revealed that the remarkable capacity of these players to memorize visual information specific to chess (possibly the very reason these individuals are gifted at chess) was not the equivalent of photographic memory.
(B) For example, many expert chess players possess a remarkable capacity to recall the position of chess pieces at any point from a game. The ability to retain an accurate mental image of the chessboard permits these players to play multiple boards at a time ― even while they are blindfolded!
(C) It was not surprising, then, when researchers observed that expert chess players have a much greater aptitude to remember chessboard patterns compared to test subjects who do not play chess. However, if researchers challenged the expert chess players with randomly generated board patterns, the expert players were no better than novice chess players at recalling chessboard patterns.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.



　Coevolution is the concept that two or more species of organisms can reciprocally influence the evolutionary direction of the other. In other words, organisms affect the evolution of other organisms. Since all organisms are influenced by other organisms, this is a common pattern. ( ① ) For example, grazing animals and the grasses they consume have coevolved. ( ② ) Grasses that are eaten by grazing animals grow from the base of the plant near the ground rather than from the tips of the branches as many plants do. ( ③ ) Furthermore, grasses have hard materials in their cell walls that make it difficult for animals to crush the cell walls and digest them. ( ④ ) Many grazers have teeth that are very long or grow continuously to compensate for the wear associated with grinding hard cell walls. ( ⑤ ) Others, such as cattle, have complicated digestive tracts that allow microorganisms to do most of the work of digestion. [3점]
* digestive tract: 소화관
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

38.



　To say that the artist must have the cooperation of others for       the        art      work        to     occur         as     it    finally         does         does    not    mean that he cannot work without that cooperation. ( ① ) The art work, after all, need not occur as it does, but can take many other forms, including those which allow it to be done without others’ help. ( ② ) Thus, though poets do depend on printers and publishers, one can produce poetry without them. ( ③ ) In both cases, the poetry does not circulate in conventional print because the artist would not accept the censorship or rewriting imposed by those who would publish the work. ( ④ ) The poet either has to reproduce and circulate his work himself or not have it circulated. ( ⑤ ) But he can still write poetry.
* censorship: 검열




?


(A) (B)
① contradict	……	distraction
② contradict	……	success
③ confirm	……	error
④ confirm	……	confidence
⑤ disprove	……	satisfaction




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 











(C) 

(D) 


41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Instincts: Genes Decide Them All
② The Birth and Challenges of Brain Science
③ Hardwired Animals vs. Adaptable Humans
④ How Animals and Humans Interact to Survive
⑤ What Living Things Learn from World Experience

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 학업을 위해 집을 떠나왔다.
② 잃어버린 여권을 되찾지 못했다.
③ 뒤차에서 내린 사람이 다가올 때 심장이 두근거렸다.
④ 운전사로부터 Kuching에 관한 정보를 얻었다.
⑤ 운전하는 것을 매우 좋아한다.




2019학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의  내용과 일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. You can’t study with us.
② Okay. I’ll do the report by myself.
③ Sure. I’ll call you when I’m done.
④ Yes. I’m pleased to join your team.
⑤ Sorry. You have to finish by tomorrow.





2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Be careful. The roads are slippery.
② I agree. The seats are very comfortable.
③ Wonderful. Let’s attend the program together.
④ Great. I’ll register my son for the program.
⑤ I’m sorry. Your son has to wait longer.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 경기 취소를 공지하려고
② 팬클럽 가입을 권유하려고
③ 경기장 개장을 홍보하려고
④ 웹 사이트 점검을 안내하려고
⑤ 시상식 일정 변경을 사과하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 실패한 실험을 분석하면 실험에 성공할 수 있다.
② 과학 수업에서는 이론과 실습이 병행되어야 한다.
③ 과학자가 되기 위해서는 인문학적 소양도 필요하다.
④ 실험 일지는 실험 보고서 작성에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 실험을 할 때마다 안전 교육을 해야 한다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 모델 － 사진작가	② 기증자 － 박물관 직원
③ 영화 관람객 － 티켓 판매원	④ 인테리어 디자이너 － 건축가
⑤ 고객 － 가구점 직원
7. 
대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 발표 주제 정하기	② 식용 곤충 조사하기
③ 설문 조사 결과 분류하기	④ 사진 촬영하기
⑤ 유인물 배부하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 드론 비행 대회에 참가할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 부모님이 방문하셔서
② 취업 면접에 가야 해서
③ 졸업식에 참석해야 해서
④ 파트너를 구하지 못해서
⑤ 드론을 갖고 있지 않아서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $120	② $140	③ $160	④ $180	⑤ $200


10. 대화를 듣고, International Fireworks Festival에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개최 일시	② 개최 장소	③ 참가국
④ 주제	⑤ 교통편


11. 2018 Upcycling Workshop에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 3일간 진행될 것이다.
② 세미나실에서 열릴 것이다.
③ 패션 디자이너가 가르칠 것이다.
④ 모든 재료가 제공된다.
⑤ 참가 연령에 제한이 없다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 도마를 고르시오.
Cutting Boards at Camilo’s Kitchen

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Absolutely! You should go and see a doctor.
② No problem. I’ll visit you on my business trip.
③ Sure. You can check the directions before driving.
④ Okay. I’ll ask my team so I can take the medicine.
⑤ Right. Taking a trip is a great way to relieve stress.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① I agree. The actors performed well in the musical.
② You’re right. Let’s wait for the reviews of the musical.
③ Good. Now, we should rewrite the script of the musical.
④ Great. I need a new musical instrument for our performance.
⑤ Thanks. Then, I’ll read the novel before I watch the musical.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Steve가 Cathy에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Steve:   	
① You should highlight your volunteer experience as a translator.
② How about volunteering together for the translation club?
③ Why don’t you help me write a self-introduction letter?
④ You need to spend more time practicing translation.
⑤ You’d better become more qualified as a volunteer.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① why traditional foods are popular
② misconceptions about organic foods
③ unexpected origins of common foods
④ when foods spread across countries
⑤ importance of eating fresh foods

17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① Caesar salad	② bagels	③ kiwis
④ potatoes	⑤ buffalo wings


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Mr. Reese,
　A few days ago, I submitted my application and recipe for the 2nd Annual DC Metro Cooking Contest.  However, I would like to change my recipe if it is possible. I have checked the website again, but I could only find information about the contest date, time, and prizes. I couldn’t see any information about changing recipes. I have just created a great new recipe, and I believe people will love this more than the one I have already submitted. Please let me know if I can change   my submitted recipe. I look forward to your response.
Best Regards, Sophia Walker

① 요리 대회 일정을 안내하려고
② 요리 대회 심사 결과를 확인하려고
③ 요리법 변경 가능 여부를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 요리법 개발을 요청하려고
⑤ 요리 대회 불참을 통보하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Dave의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The waves were perfect for surfing. Dave, however, just could not stay on his board. He had tried more than ten times  to stand up but never managed it. He felt that he would never succeed. He was about to give up when he looked at the sea one last time. The swelling waves seemed to say, “Come on, Dave. One more try!” Taking a deep breath, he picked up his board and ran into the water. He waited for the right wave. Finally, it came. He jumped up onto the board just like he had practiced. And this time, standing upright, he battled the wave all the way back to shore. Walking out of the water joyfully, he cheered, “Wow, I did it!”
① frustrated → delighted	② bored	→ comforted
③ calm	→ annoyed	④ relieved → frightened
⑤ pleased	→ upset

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　War is inconceivable without some image, or concept, of the enemy. It is the presence of the enemy that gives meaning and justification to war. ‘War follows from feelings of hatred’, wrote Carl Schmitt. ‘War has its own strategic, tactical, and other rules and points of view, but they all presuppose that the political decision has already been made as to who the enemy is’. The concept of the enemy is fundamental to the moral assessment of war: ‘The basic aim of a nation at war in establishing an image of the enemy is to distinguish as sharply as possible the act of killing from the act of murder’. However, we need to be cautious about thinking of war and the image of the enemy  that informs it in an abstract and uniform way. Rather, both must be seen for the cultural and contingent phenomena that they are.
* contingent: 불확정적인
① 전쟁과 적을 추상적이고 획일적으로 개념화하는 것을 경계해야 한다.
② 적에 따라 다양한 전략과 전술을 수립하고 적용해야 한다.
③ 보편적 윤리관에 기초하여 적의 개념을 정의해야 한다.
④ 전쟁 예방에 도움이 되는 정치적 결정을 해야 한다.
⑤ 어떠한 경우에도 전쟁을 정당화하지 말아야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 refining ignorance가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Although not the explicit goal, the best science can really be seen as refining ignorance. Scientists, especially young ones, can get too obsessed with results. Society helps them along in this mad chase. Big discoveries are covered in the press, show up on the university’s home page, help get grants, and make  the case for promotions. But it’s wrong. Great scientists, the pioneers that we admire, are not concerned with results but with the next questions. The highly respected physicist Enrico Fermi  told  his  students  that  an  experiment  that successfully
proves a hypothesis is a measurement; one that doesn’t is a discovery.  A  discovery,  an  uncovering ― of  new  ignorance.
The Nobel Prize, the pinnacle of scientific accomplishment, is awarded, not for a lifetime of scientific achievement, but for a single discovery, a result. Even the Nobel committee realizes  in some way that this is not really in the scientific spirit, and their award citations commonly honor the discovery  for  having “opened a field up,” “transformed a field,” or “taken a field in new and unexpected directions.”
* pinnacle: 정점
① looking beyond what is known towards what is left unknown
② offering an ultimate account of what has been discovered
③ analyzing existing knowledge with an objective mindset
④ inspiring scientists to publicize significant discoveries
⑤ informing students of a new field of science



22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　With the industrial society evolving into an information-based society, the concept of information as a product, a commodity with its own value, has emerged. As a consequence, those people, organizations, and countries that possess the highest-quality information are likely to prosper economically, socially, and politically. Investigations into the economics of information encompass a variety of categories including the costs of information and information services; the effects of information on decision making; the savings from effective information acquisition; the effects of information on productivity; and the effects of specific agencies (such as corporate, technical, or medical libraries) on the productivity of organizations. Obviously many of these areas overlap, but it is clear that information has taken on a life of its own outside the medium in which it is contained. Information has become a recognized entity to be measured, evaluated, and priced.
* entity: 실재(물)
① 정보화된 사회일수록 개인 정보 보호가 필요하다.
② 정보의 효율적 교환은 조직의 생산성을 향상시킨다.
③ 정보 처리의 단순화는 신속한 의사 결정에 도움이 된다.
④ 정보 기반 사회에서 정보는 독자적 상품 가치를 지닌다.
⑤ 정보 기반 사회에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식이 중요하다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　We argue that the ethical principles of justice provide an essential foundation for policies to protect  unborn  generations and the poorest countries from climate change. Related issues arise in connection with current and persistently inadequate  aid for these nations, in the face of growing threats to agriculture and water supply, and the rules of international trade that mainly benefit rich countries. Increasing aid for the world’s poorest peoples can be an essential part of effective mitigation. With 20 percent of carbon emissions from (mostly tropical) deforestation, carbon credits for forest preservation would combine aid to poorer countries with one of the most cost-effective forms of abatement. Perhaps the most cost-effective but politically complicated policy reform would be the removal of several hundred  billions  of  dollars  of  direct  annual  subsidies  from the
two  biggest  recipients   in   the  OECD ― destructive industrial
agriculture and fossil fuels. Even a small amount of this money would accelerate the already rapid rate of technical progress and investment in renewable energy in many areas, as well as encourage the essential switch to conservation agriculture.
* mitigation: 완화 ** abatement: 감소 *** subsidy: 보조금
① reforming diplomatic policies in poor countries
② increasing global awareness of the environmental crisis
③ reasons for restoring economic equality in poor countries
④ coping with climate change by reforming aid and policies
⑤ roles of the OECD in solving international conflicts


24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A defining element of catastrophes is the magnitude of their harmful consequences. To help societies prevent or reduce damage from catastrophes, a huge amount of effort and technological sophistication are often employed to assess and communicate the size and scope of potential or actual  losses. This effort assumes that people can understand the resulting numbers and act on them appropriately. However, recent behavioral research casts doubt on this fundamental assumption. Many people do not understand large numbers. Indeed, large numbers have been found to lack meaning and to be underestimated in decisions unless they convey affect (feeling). This creates a paradox that rational models of decision making fail to represent. On the one hand, we respond strongly to aid a single individual in need. On the other hand, we often fail to prevent mass tragedies or take appropriate measures to reduce potential losses from natural disasters.
* catastrophe: 큰 재해
① Insensitivity to Mass Tragedy: We Are Lost in Large Numbers
② Power of Numbers: A Way of Classifying Natural Disasters
③ How to Reach Out a Hand to People in Desperate Need
④ Preventing Potential Losses Through Technology
⑤ Be Careful, Numbers Magnify Feelings!


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Top Ten Origin Countries of International Students
(School Years 1979-1980 and 2016-2017)

	
?Note: Detail may not add to total shown because of rounding.
　The tables above show the top ten origin countries and the number of international students enrolled in U.S. colleges and universities in two school years, 1979-1980 and 2016-2017.
① The total number of international students in 2016-2017 was over three times larger than the total number of international students in 1979-1980. ② Iran, Taiwan, and Nigeria were the top three origin countries of international students in 1979-1980, among which only Taiwan was included in the list of the top ten origin countries in  2016-2017. ③ The number of students from India was over twenty times larger in 2016-2017 than in 1979-1980, and India ranked higher than China in 2016-2017. ④ South Korea, which was not included among the top ten origin countries in 1979-1980, ranked third in 2016-2017. ⑤ Although the number of students from Japan was larger in 2016-2017 than  in 1979-1980, Japan ranked lower in 2016-2017 than in 1979-1980.

26. Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치 하지 않는 것은?
　Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings, an American author born in Washington, D.C. in 1896, wrote novels with rural themes and settings. While she was young, one of her stories appeared in The Washington Post. After graduating from university, Rawlings worked as a journalist while simultaneously trying   to establish herself as a fiction writer. In 1928, she purchased an orange grove in Cross Creek, Florida. This became the source of inspiration for some of her writings which included The Yearling and her autobiographical book, Cross Creek. In 1939, The Yearling, which was about a boy and an orphaned baby deer, won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Later, in 1946, The Yearling was made into a film of the same name. Rawlings passed away in 1953, and the land she owned at Cross Creek has become a Florida State Park honoring her achievements.
* grove: 과수원
① Washington, D.C.에서 태어난 미국 작가이다.
② 그녀의 이야기 중 하나가 The Washington Post에 실렸다.
③ 대학교를 졸업한 후 저널리스트로 일했다.
④ The Yearling이라는 소설은 다른 제목으로 영화화되었다.
⑤ Cross Creek에 소유했던 땅은 Florida 주립 공원이 되었다.
27. 
Flying Eagle Zipline Ride에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


Flying Eagle Zipline Ride
Soar through the treetops over Lost Forest on our thrilling Flying Eagle Zipline! Feel the thrill of flying like an eagle!
?Age requirement: 13 years old and over
?Price: ￡20
?Zipline length: 500 metres
?Duration: 30 minutes
(including safety instruction)
?Restrictions:
－ People with back problems
or serious heart conditions
－ Weight: over 125 kg
－ Height: under 120 cm
※ We do not take responsibility for lost valuables.
※ No advanced reservations are necessary.
Please visit our website at www.flyingeaglezip.co.uk for more information.

① 13세 이상부터 탈 수 있다.
② 집라인의 길이는 500미터이다.
③ 체중 제한이 있다.
④ 분실한 귀중품에 대해 책임을 지지 않는다.
⑤ 사전 예약이 필요하다.

28. Wireless Charging Pad 사용에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Wireless Charging Pad
－ Instructions －
Wireless Smartphone Charging:
1. Connect the charging pad to a power source.
2. Place your smartphone on the charging pad with the display facing up.
3. Place your smartphone on the center of the charging pad (or it will not charge).
Charge Status LED:
?Blue Light: Your smartphone is charging. If there’s a problem, the blue light will flash.
?White Light: Your smartphone is fully charged.
Caution:
?Do not place anything between your smartphone and the charging pad while charging.
?The charging pad is not water-resistant. Keep it dry.

① 스마트폰의 화면을 아래로 향하게 두어야 한다.
② 스마트폰을 충전 패드 중앙에 놓지 않아도 된다.
③ LED 빛이 흰색이면 스마트폰이 완전히 충전되지 않은 것이다.
④ 스마트폰과 충전 패드 사이에 어떤 것도 놓지 않아야 한다.
⑤ 충전 패드는 방수가 된다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　“Monumental” is a word that comes very close to ① expressing the basic characteristic of Egyptian art. Never before  and  never since has the quality of monumentality been achieved as fully as it ② did in Egypt. The reason for this is not the external size and massiveness of their works, although the Egyptians admittedly achieved some amazing things in this respect. Many modern structures exceed ③ those of Egypt in terms of purely physical size. But massiveness has nothing to do with monumentality. An Egyptian sculpture no bigger than  a person’s hand is more monumental than that gigantic pile of stones ④ that constitutes the war memorial in Leipzig, for instance. Monumentality is not a matter of external weight, but of “inner weight.” This inner weight is the quality which Egyptian art possesses to such a degree that everything in it seems to be made of primeval stone, like a mountain range,
even if it is only a few inches across or ⑤ carved in wood.

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Finkenauer and Rim? investigated the memory of the unexpected death of Belgium’s King Baudouin in 1993 in a large sample of Belgian citizens. The data revealed that the news of the king’s death had been widely socially shared. By talking about the event, people gradually constructed a social narrative and a collective memory of the emotional event. At the same time, they consolidated their own memory of the personal circumstances in which the event took place,  an  effect known as “flashbulb memory.” The more an event is socially shared, the more it will be fixed in people’s minds. Social sharing may in this way help to counteract some natural tendency people may have. Naturally, people should be driven to “forget” undesirable events. Thus, someone who just heard  a piece of bad news often tends initially to deny what happened. The 	social sharing of the bad news contributes to realism.

* gigantic: 거대한 ** primeval: 원시 시대의













30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Europe’s first Homo sapiens lived primarily on large game, particularly reindeer. Even under ideal circumstances, hunting these fast animals with spear or bow and arrow is an ① uncertain task. The reindeer, however, had a ② weakness that mankind would mercilessly exploit: it swam poorly. While afloat, it is uniquely ③ vulnerable, moving slowly with its antlers held high as it struggles to keep its nose above water. At some point,  a  Stone Age genius realized the enormous hunting ④ advantage he would gain by being able to glide over the water’s surface, and built the first boat. Once the ⑤ laboriously overtaken and killed prey had been hauled aboard, getting its body back to the tribal camp would have been far easier by boat than on land. It would  not have taken long for mankind to apply this advantage to other goods.
* exploit: 이용하다 ** haul: 끌어당기다

* consolidate: 공고히 하다
① biased	② illegal	③ repetitive
④ temporary	⑤ rational









32. Minorities tend not to have much power or status and may even be dismissed as troublemakers, extremists or simply ‘weirdos’. How, then, do they ever have any influence over the majority? The social psychologist Serge Moscovici claims that the answer lies in their behavioural style, i.e. the way
 	. The crucial factor in the success of the suffragette movement was that its supporters were consistent in their views, and this created a considerable degree of social influence. Minorities that are active and organised, who support and defend their position consistently, can create social conflict, doubt and uncertainty among members of the majority, and ultimately this may lead to social change. Such change has often occurred because a minority has converted others to its point of view. Without the influence of minorities, we would have no innovation, no  social change. Many of what we now regard as ‘major’ social movements (e.g. Christianity, trade unionism or feminism) were originally due to the influence of an outspoken minority.
* dismiss: 일축하다 ** weirdo: 별난 사람
*** suffragette: 여성 참정권론자
① the minority gets its point across
② the minority tones down its voice
③ the majority cultivates the minority
④ the majority brings about social change
⑤ the minority cooperates with the majority


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Heritage is concerned with the ways in which very selective material artefacts, mythologies, memories and traditions become resources for the present. The contents, interpretations and representations of the resource are selected according to the demands of the present; an imagined past provides resources for a heritage that is to be passed onto an imagined future. It follows too that the meanings and functions of memory and tradition are defined in the present. Further, heritage is more concerned with meanings than material artefacts. It is the former that give value, either cultural or financial, to the latter and explain why they have been selected from the near infinity of the past. In turn, they may later be discarded as the demands of present societies change, or even, as is presently occurring in the former Eastern Europe, when pasts have to be reinvented to reflect new presents. Thus heritage is 	. [3점]
① a collection of memories and traditions of a society
② as much about forgetting as remembering the past
③ neither concerned with the present nor the future
④ a mirror reflecting the artefacts of the past
⑤ about preserving universal cultural values









34. The human species is unique in its ability to expand its
functionality by inventing new cultural tools. Writing, arithmetic, science ― all are recent inventions. Our brains did not have enough time to evolve for them, but I reason that they were made
possible because 	. When we learn to read, we recycle a specific region of our visual system known as the visual word-form area, enabling us to recognize strings of letters and connect them to language
areas. Likewise, when we learn Arabic numerals we build a circuit to quickly convert those shapes into quantities ― a fast connection from bilateral visual areas to the parietal quantity
area. Even an invention as elementary as finger-counting changes our cognitive abilities dramatically. Amazonian people who have not invented counting are unable to make exact calculations as
simple  as,  say,  6?2.  This  “cultural  recycling”  implies  that the
functional architecture of the human brain results from a complex mixture of biological and cultural constraints. [3점]
* bilateral: 양측의 ** parietal: 정수리(부분)의
*** constraint: 제약
① our brains put a limit on cultural diversity
② we can mobilize our old areas in novel ways
③ cultural tools stabilize our brain functionality
④ our brain regions operate in an isolated manner
⑤ we cannot adapt ourselves to natural challenges
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　When photography came along in the nineteenth century, painting was put in crisis. The  photograph, it  seemed, did  the work of imitating nature better than the painter ever could.
① Some painters made practical use of the invention. ② There were Impressionist painters who used a photograph in place of the model or landscape they were painting. ③ But by and large, the photograph was a challenge to painting and was one cause of painting’s moving away from direct representation and reproduction to the abstract painting of the twentieth century. ④ Therefore, the painters of that century put more focus on expressing nature, people, and  cities as  they  were in reality. ⑤ Since photographs did such a good job of representing things as they existed in the world, painters were freed to look inward and represent things as they were in their imagination, rendering emotion in the color, volume, line, and spatial configurations native to the painter’s art.
* render: 표현하다 ** configuration: 배치



[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) But for all of these difficulties for psychology, the payoff of the scientific method is that the findings are replicable; that is, if you run the same study again  following  the same procedures, you will be very likely to get the same results.
(B) It often requires compromises, such as testing behavior within laboratories rather than natural settings, and asking those readily available (such as introduction to psychology students) to participate rather than collecting data from a true cross-section of the population. It often requires great cleverness to conceive of measures that tap into what people are thinking without altering their thinking, called reactivity.
(C) Simply knowing they are being observed may cause people to behave differently (such as more politely!). People may give answers that they feel are more socially desirable than their true feelings.
* replicable: 반복 가능한
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.

	

(A) Likewise, if there are things you can’t recall, your schemata will fill in the gaps with knowledge about  what’s typical in that situation. As a result, a reliance on schemata will inevitably make the world seem more “normal” than it really is and will make the past seem more “regular” than it actually was.
(B) Any reliance on schematic knowledge, therefore, will be shaped by this information about what’s “normal.” Thus,  if there are things you don’t notice while viewing a situation or event, your schemata will lead you to fill in these “gaps” with knowledge about what’s normally in place in that setting.
(C) But schematic knowledge can also hurt you, promoting errors in perception and memory. Moreover, the types of errors produced by schemata are quite predictable: Bear in mind that schemata summarize the broad pattern of your experience, and so they tell you, in essence, what’s typical or ordinary in a given situation. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
A major challenge for map-makers is the depiction of hills and valleys, slopes and flatlands collectively called the topography. This can be done in various ways. One is to create an image of sunlight and shadow so that wrinkles of the topography are alternately lit and shaded, creating a visual representation of the shape of the land. ( ① ) Another,  technically  more  accurate way is to draw contour lines. ( ② ) A contour line connects all points that lie at the same elevation. ( ③ ) When the contour lines are positioned closely together, the hill’s slope is steep; if they lie farther apart, the slope is gentler. ( ④ ) Contour  lines can represent scarps, hollows, and valleys of the local topography. ( ⑤ ) At a glance, they reveal whether the relief in the mapped area is great or small: a “busy” contour map means lots of high relief. [3점]
* concentric: 중심이 같은 ** scarp: 가파른 비탈
*** relief: (토지의) 고저, 기복

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The printing press boosted the power of ideas to copy themselves. Prior to low-cost printing, ideas could and did spread by word of mouth. While this was tremendously powerful, it limited the complexity of the ideas that could be propagated to those that a single person could remember. ( ① ) It also added a certain amount of guaranteed error. ( ② ) The spread of ideas by word of mouth was equivalent to a game of telephone on a global scale. ( ③ ) But the incredible amount  of time required to copy a scroll or book by hand limited the speed with which information could spread this way. ( ④ ) A well-trained monk could transcribe around four pages of text per day. ( ⑤ ) A printing press could copy information thousands of times faster, allowing knowledge to spread far more quickly, with full fidelity, than ever before.
* fidelity: 충실 ** propagate: 전파하다







	



(A) (B)
① immediate …… competitive
② available	…… expensive
③ delayed	…… competitive
④ convenient …… expensive
⑤ abundant	…… competitive


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)















(C)
(D)












41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What It Takes to Satisfy Workers
② Why Workers Have Struggled for More Leisure
③ The Birth and Evolution of Leisure in Capitalism
④ How to Strike a Balance Between Work and Leisure
⑤ The Light and Dark Sides of the Modern Leisure Industry

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 할머니는 Olivia와 Ellie에게 도움을 요청했다.
② Olivia와 Ellie는 양배추밭에 있는 애벌레를 잡지 않았다.
③ Olivia에게 양배추밭은 마치 전쟁터 같았다.
④ Olivia와 Ellie는 양배추밭이 얼마나 드넓은지 새삼 깨달았다.
⑤ 할머니는 Olivia에게 자연의 섭리를 일깨워주었다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2024학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1







1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 축구 경기장 사용 수칙을 설명하려고
② 지역 아동 병원의 개원을 홍보하려고
③ 자선 축구 경기의 변경된 일정을 공지하려고
④ 축구 경기 티켓의 구매 사이트를 소개하려고
⑤ 자선 축구 경기 자원봉사자 모집을 안내하려고

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 상대방이 말할 때는 말을 끊지 말아야 한다.
② 회의 발언은 주제에서 벗어나지 않아야 한다.
③ 적절한 제스처는 대화의 전달력을 높일 수 있다.
④ 회의를 진행할 때는 개인적인 감정을 배제해야 한다.
⑤ 자신의 의견을 주장할 때는 충분한 근거를 들어야 한다.

3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 일정한 실내 온도 유지는 건강에 중요한 역할을 한다.
② 충분한 햇빛 노출은 수면 호르몬 분비를 촉진한다.
③ 정서 안정을 위해서는 양질의 수면이 필요하다.
④ 수면 안대를 착용하면 잠드는 데 도움이 될 수 있다.
⑤ 적당한 밝기의 조명은 일의 능률을 향상시킬 수 있다.

4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 신입 회원 선물 준비하기	② 대회 일정 인쇄하기
③ 음악 재생 목록 만들기	④ 식당 예약하기
⑤ 문자 메시지 보내기

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $63	② $70	③ $72	④ $78	⑤ $80




7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 산책을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 얇은 재킷을 입어서
② 회의 준비를 해야 해서
③ 알레르기 증상이 심해서
④ 경찰서에 방문해야 해서
⑤ 병원 진료를 받아야 해서

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 예약할 연극 공연에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 제목	② 날짜	③ 출연자
④ 입장료	⑤ 시작 시각

9. Golden  Palette  Walking  Tour에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월에 매일 진행된다.
② 안내 책자가 무료로 제공된다.
③ 오전 10시 30분에 시작한다.
④ 출발 지점은 Central Studio의 남쪽 문이다.
⑤ 참가자 전원은 선물을 받을 것이다.

10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 접이식 카트를 고르시오.
Foldable Carts


①
②
③
④
⑤


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. We should’ve watched them.
② Why not? Just put the mat on the shelf.
③ Great. We can store some snacks at home.
④ I’m sorry. I can’t find the parking lot.
⑤ No problem. I’ll take care of it.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s too bad. I was looking forward to seeing you there.
② Thank you. I’m so glad you could make it to the party.
③ That’s okay. The birthday party has already finished.
④ Sure. I’ll arrange the business trip for you and your team.
⑤ Don’t worry. My boss will return from the trip this Monday.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Don’t give up! You’ve inspired me to be a painter.
② Cheer up! The fashion market is open to everybody.
③ You have a point. I don’t have any fashion sense at all.
④ I agree. You should make a balance between work and life.
⑤ Be positive. You can start pursuing your dream at any time.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① No worries. I can go pick it up now.
② All right. Just be sure to return it tomorrow.
③ That’s okay. We can fix the system next week.
④ Sorry to hear that. You can buy it next time.
⑤ Never mind. I’ll bring a new copy for you.


15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Jake가 Yuna에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jake:   	
① Could you please take my picture again with the rock in it?
② I’d appreciate it if you could come to the mountain with me.
③ You shouldn’t take any photos while climbing the rock.
④ I’m wondering if you can pose in front of the rock.
⑤ Why don’t you take a selfie in the national park?




[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① various natural materials as a source of building supplies
② how upcycling is used in architecture across the globe
③ strategic use of upcycled plastics in different countries
④ impact of architectural waste on the global environment
⑤ why nations should employ eco-friendly shipping methods


17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① Singapore	② Mexico	③ Australia
④ Indonesia	⑤ France



18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

　I’m Charlie Reeves, manager of Toon  Skills Company.  If you’re interested in new webtoon-making skills and techniques, this post is for you. This year, we’ve launched special online courses, which contain a variety of contents about webtoon production. Each course consists of ten  units that help improve your drawing and story-telling skills. Moreover, these courses are designed to suit any  level, from beginner to advanced. It costs $45 for one course,   and you can watch your course as many times as you want for six months. Our courses with talented and experienced instructors will open up a new world of creativity for you. It’s time to start creating your webtoon world at https://webtoonskills.com.
① 웹툰 제작 온라인 강좌를 홍보하려고
② 웹툰 작가 채용 정보를 제공하려고
③ 신작 웹툰 공개 일정을 공지하려고
④ 웹툰 창작 대회에 출품을 권유하려고
⑤ 기초적인 웹툰 제작 방법을 설명하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 David의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　David was starting a new job in Vancouver, and he was waiting for his bus. He kept looking back and forth between  his watch and the direction the bus would come from. He thought, “My bus isn’t here yet. I can’t be late on my first  day.”  David couldn’t feel at ease. When he looked up again,  he saw a different bus coming that was going right  to  his work. The bus stopped in front of him and opened its door. He got on the bus thinking, “Phew! Luckily, this bus came just in time so I won’t be late.” He leaned back on an unoccupied seat in the bus and took a deep breath, finally able to relax.
① nervous → relieved	② lonely	→ hopeful
③ pleased  → confused	④ indifferent → delighted
⑤ bored	→ thrilled

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Values alone do not create and build culture. Living your values only some of the time does not contribute to the  creation and maintenance of culture. Changing values into behaviors is only half the battle. Certainly, this is a step in the right direction, but those behaviors must then be shared and distributed widely throughout the organization, along with a clear and concise description of what is expected. It is not enough to simply talk about it. It is critical to have a visual representation of the specific behaviors that leaders and all people managers can use to coach their people. Just like a sports team has a playbook with specific plays designed to  help them perform well and win, your company should have a playbook with the key shifts needed to transform your culture into action and turn your values into winning behaviors.
① 조직 문화 혁신을 위해서 모든 구성원이 공유할 핵심 가치를 정립해야 한다.
② 조직 구성원의 행동을 변화시키려면 지도자는 명확한 가치관을 가져야 한다.
③ 조직 내 문화가 공유되기 위해서 구성원의 자발적 행동이 뒷받침되어야 한다.
④ 조직의 핵심 가치 실현을 위해 구성원 간의 지속적인 의사소통이 필수적이다.
⑤ 조직의 문화 형성에는 가치를 반영한 행동의 공유를위한 명시적지침이필요하다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 밑줄 친 a nonstick frying pan이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　How you focus your attention plays a critical role in how  you deal with stress. Scattered attention harms your ability to let go of stress, because even  though your attention  is scattered, it is narrowly focused, for you are able to fixate only on the stressful parts of your experience. When your attentional spotlight is widened, you can more easily let go of stress. You can put in perspective many more aspects of any situation and not get locked into one part that ties you down to superficial and anxiety-provoking levels of attention. A narrow focus heightens the stress level of each experience, but a widened focus turns down the stress level because you’re better able to put each situation into a broader perspective. One anxiety-provoking detail is less important than the bigger picture. It’s like transforming yourself into a nonstick frying pan. You can still fry an egg, but the egg won’t stick to the pan.
* provoke: 유발시키다
① never being confronted with any stressful experiences in daily life
② broadening one’s perspective to identify the cause of stress
③ rarely confining one’s attention to positive aspects of an experience
④ having a larger view of an experience beyond its stressful aspects
⑤ taking stress into account as the source of developing a wide view



22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Being able to prioritize your responses allows you to connect more deeply with individual customers, be it a one-off interaction around a particularly delightful or upsetting experience, or the development of a longer-term relationship with a significantly influential individual within your customer base. If  you’ve ever posted a favorable comment ― or any comment, for that matter ― about a brand, product or service, think about what it would feel like if you were personally acknowledged by the brand manager,  for example, as a result. In general, people  post because they have something to say ― and because they want to be recognized for having said it. In particular, when people post positive comments they are expressions of appreciation for the experience that led to the post. While a compliment to the person standing next to you is typically answered with a response like “Thank You,”  the sad fact is  that most brand compliments go unanswered. These are lost opportunities to understand what drove the compliments and create a solid fan based on them.
* compliment: 칭찬
① 고객과의 관계 증진을 위해 고객의 브랜드 칭찬에 응답하는 것은 중요하다.
② 고객의피드백을 면밀히 분석함으로써 브랜드의 성공 가능성을 높일 수 있다.
③ 신속한 고객 응대를 통해서 고객의 긍정적인 반응을 이끌어 낼 수 있다.
④ 브랜드 매니저에게는 고객의 부정적인 의견을 수용하는 태도가 요구된다.
⑤ 고객의 의견을 경청하는 것은 브랜드의 새로운 이미지 창출에 도움이 된다.
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Managers of natural resources typically face market incentives that provide financial rewards for exploitation. For example, owners of forest lands have a market incentive to cut down trees rather than manage the forest for carbon capture, wildlife habitat, flood protection, and other ecosystem services. These services provide the owner with no financial benefits, and thus are unlikely to influence management decisions. But the economic benefits provided by these services, based on their non-market values, may exceed the economic value of the timber. For example, a United Nations initiative has estimated that the economic benefits of ecosystem services provided by tropical forests, including climate regulation, water purification, and erosion prevention, are over three times greater per hectare than the market benefits. Thus cutting down the trees is economically inefficient, and markets are not sending the correct “signal” to favor ecosystem services over extractive uses.
* exploitation: 이용  ** timber: 목재
① necessity of calculating the market values of ecosystem services
② significance of weighing forest resources’ non-market values
③ impact of using forest resources to maximize financial benefits
④ merits of balancing forests’ market and non-market values
⑤ ways of increasing the efficiency of managing natural resources



24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The concept of overtourism rests on a particular assumption about people and places common in tourism studies and the social sciences in general. Both are seen as clearly defined and demarcated. People are framed as bounded social actors either playing the role of hosts or guests. Places, in a similar way, are treated as stable containers with clear boundaries. Hence, places can be full of tourists and thus suffer from overtourism. But what does it mean for a place to be full of people? Indeed, there are examples of particular attractions that have limited capacity and where there is actually no room for more visitors. This is not least the case with some man-made constructions such as the Eiffel Tower. However, with places such as cities, regions or even whole countries being promoted as destinations and described as victims of overtourism, things become more complex. What is excessive or out of proportion is highly relative and might be more related to other aspects than physical capacity, such as natural degradation and economic leakages (not to mention politics and local power dynamics).
* demarcate: 경계를 정하다
① The Solutions to Overtourism: From Complex to Simple
② What Makes Popular Destinations Attractive to Visitors?
③ Are Tourist Attractions Winners or Losers of Overtourism?
④ The Severity of Overtourism: Much Worse than Imagined
⑤ Overtourism: Not Simply a Matter of People and Places


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. Turtle Island Boat Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


Turtle Island Boat Tour
　The fantastic Turtle Island Boat Tour invites you to the beautiful sea world.
Dates: From June 1 to August 31, 2024
Tour Times

Weekdays1 p.m.?5 p.m.Weekends9 a.m.?1 p.m.1 p.m.?5 p.m.


　The above graph shows the percentages of the respondents  in five countries who sometimes or often actively avoided news in 2017, 2019, and 2022. ① For each of the three years, Ireland showed the highest percentage of the respondents who sometimes or often actively avoided news, among the countries in the graph. ② In Germany, the percentage of the respondents who sometimes or often actively avoided news was less than 30% in each of the three years. ③ In Denmark, the percentage of the respondents who sometimes or often actively avoided news in 2019 was higher than that in 2017 but lower than that in 2022. ④ In Finland, the percentage of the respondents who sometimes or often actively avoided news in 2019 was lower than that in 2017, which was also true for Japan. ⑤ In Japan, the percentage of the respondents who sometimes or often actively avoided news did not exceed 15% in each of the three years.


26. Charles H. Townes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Charles H. Townes, one of the most influential American physicists, was born in South Carolina. In his childhood, he grew up on a farm, studying the stars in the sky. He earned his doctoral degree from the California Institute of Technology in 1939, and then he took a job at Bell Labs in New York City. After World War II, he became an associate professor of physics at Columbia University. In 1958, Townes and his co-researcher proposed the concept of the laser. Laser technology won quick acceptance in industry and research. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1964. He was also involved in Project Apollo, the moon landing project. His contribution is priceless because the Internet and all digital media would be unimaginable without the laser.
① 어린 시절에 농장에서 성장하였다.
② 박사 학위를 받기 전에 Bell Labs에서 일했다.
③ 1958년에 레이저의 개념을 제안하였다.
④ 1964년에 노벨 물리학상을 수상하였다.
⑤ 달 착륙 프로젝트에 관여하였다.

※ Each tour lasts four hours.
Tickets & Booking
?$50 per person for each tour
(Only those aged 17 and over can participate.)
?Bookings must be completed no later than 2 days before the day of the tour.
?No refunds after the departure time
?Each tour group size is limited to 10 participants.
Activities
?Snorkeling with a professional diver
?Feeding tropical fish
※ Feel free to explore our website, www.snorkelingti.com.

① 주말에는 하루에 두 번 운영된다.
② 17세 이상만 참가할 수 있다.
③ 당일 예약이 가능하다.
④ 출발 시간 이후에는 환불이 불가능하다.
⑤ 전문 다이버와 함께 하는 스노클링 활동이 있다.

28. 2023 Eastland High School Video Clip Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

2023 Eastland High School Video Clip Contest
　Shoot and share your most memorable moments with your teachers and friends!
Guidelines
?Theme: “Joyful Moments” in Our Growing Community
?Submissions will be accepted from December 1 to December 14.
?Submissions should be uploaded to our school website.
Video length cannot exceed three minutes.
Entries are limited to one per student.
Prizes
?1st place: $100 gift card, 2nd place: $50 gift card
?Winning videos will be posted to our school’s app.
?The prize winners will be chosen by the school art teachers.
※ For more information, visit the school website.

① 출품작의 주제가 정해져 있지 않다.
② 한 달 동안 동영상을 접수할 예정이다.
③ 출품할 동영상의 길이는 3분을 초과할 수 없다.
④ 출품작은 학생 1인당 두 개로 제한된다.
⑤ 학생회가 수상자를 선정할 것이다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　A number of studies provide substantial evidence of an innate human disposition to respond differentially to social stimuli. From birth, infants will orient preferentially towards the human face and voice, ① seeming to know that such stimuli are particularly meaningful for them. Moreover, they register this connection actively, imitating a variety of facial gestures that are presented to them ― tongue protrusions, lip tightenings, mouth openings. They will even try to match gestures ② which they have some difficulty, experimenting with their own faces until they succeed. When they ③ do succeed, they show pleasure by a brightening of their eyes; when they fail, they show distress. In  other  words, they  not only  have an innate capacity for matching their own kinaesthetically experienced bodily movements with ④ those of others that are visually perceived; they have an innate drive to do so. That is, they seem to have an innate drive to imitate others whom they judge ⑤ to be ‘like me’.
* innate: 타고난  ** disposition: 성향
*** kinaesthetically: 운동감각적으로










30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　Bazaar economies feature an apparently flexible price-setting mechanism that sits atop more enduring ties of shared culture. Both the buyer and seller are aware of each other’s ① restrictions. In Delhi’s bazaars, buyers and sellers can ② assess to a large extent the financial constraints that other actors have in their everyday life. Each actor belonging to a specific economic class understands what the other sees as a necessity and a luxury. In the case of electronic products like video games, they are not a ③ necessity at the same level as other household purchases such as food items. So, the seller in Delhi’s bazaars is careful not to directly ask for very ④ low prices for video games because at no point will the buyer see possession of them as an absolute necessity. Access to this type of knowledge establishes a price consensus by relating to each other’s preferences and limitations of belonging to a ⑤ similar cultural and economic universe.
* constraint: 압박 ** consensus: 일치

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Over the last decade the attention given to how children learn to read has foregrounded the nature of textuality, and of the different, interrelated ways in which readers of all ages make texts mean. ‘Reading’ now applies to a greater number of representational forms than at any time in the past: pictures, maps, screens, design graphics and photographs are all regarded as text. In addition to the innovations made possible in picture books by new printing processes, design  features also predominate in other kinds, such as books of poetry and information texts. Thus, reading becomes a more complicated kind of interpretation than it was when  children’s  attention was focused on the printed text, with sketches or pictures as an adjunct. Children now learn from a picture book that words  and illustrations complement and enhance each other. Reading is  not  simply 	. Even in the easiest texts, what a sentence ‘says’ is often not what it means.
* adjunct: 부속물
① knowledge acquisition	② word recognition
③ imaginative play	④ subjective interpretation
⑤ image mapping










32. A musical score within any film can add an additional layer to the film text, which goes beyond simply imitating the action viewed. In films that tell of futuristic worlds, composers, much like sound designers, have added freedom to create a world that is unknown and new to the viewer. However, unlike sound designers, composers often shy away from creating unique pieces that reflect these new worlds and often present musical scores that possess familiar structures and cadences. While it is possible that this may interfere with creativity and a sense of space and time, it in fact 	. Through recognizable scores, visions of the future or a galaxy far, far away can be placed within a recognizable  context. Such familiarity allows the viewer to be placed in a comfortable space so that the film may then lead the viewer to what is an unfamiliar, but acceptable vision of a world different from their own.
* score: 악보 ** cadence: (율동적인) 박자
① frees the plot of its familiarity
② aids in viewer access to the film
③ adds to an exotic musical experience
④ orients audiences to the film’s theme
⑤ inspires viewers to think more deeply


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. There have been psychological studies in which subjects were shown photographs of people’s faces and asked to  identify the expression or state of mind evinced. The results  are invariably very mixed. In the 17th century the French painter and theorist Charles Le Brun drew a series of faces illustrating the various emotions that painters could be called upon to represent. What is striking about them is that
 	. What is missing in all this is any setting or context to make the emotion determinate. We must know who this person is, who these other people are, what their relationship is, what is at stake in the scene, and the like. In real life as well as in painting we do not come across just faces; we encounter  people in particular situations and our understanding of people cannot somehow be precipitated and held isolated from the social and human circumstances in which they, and we, live and breathe and have our being. [3점]
* evince: (감정 따위를) 분명히 나타내다 ** precipitate: 촉발하다
① all of themcould be matched consistently withtheir intended emotions
② every one of them was illustrated with photographic precision
③ each of them definitively displayed its own social narrative
④ most of them would be seen as representing unique characteristics
⑤ any number of themcould besubstituted for one another without loss



34. Everyone who drives, walks, or swipes a transit card in a city views herself as a transportation expert from the moment she walks out the front door. And how she views the street
 	. That’s why we find so many well-intentioned and civic-minded citizens arguing past one another.  At neighborhood meetings  in school auditoriums, and in back rooms at libraries and churches, local residents across the nation gather for often-contentious discussions about transportation proposals that would change a city’s streets. And like all politics, all transportation is local and intensely personal. A transit project that could speed travel for tens of thousands of people can be stopped by objections to the loss of a few parking spaces or by the simple fear that the project won’t work. It’s not a challenge of the data or the traffic engineering or the planning. Public debates about streets are typically rooted in emotional assumptions about how a change will affect a person’s commute, ability to park, belief about what is safe and what isn’t, or the bottom line of a local business. [3점]
* swipe: 판독기에 통과시키다 ** contentious: 논쟁적인
*** commute: 통근
① relies heavily on how others see her city’s streets
② updates itself with each new public transit policy
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Speaking fast is a high-risk proposition. It’s nearly impossible to maintain the ideal conditions to be persuasive, well-spoken, and effective when the mouth is traveling well over the speed limit. ① Although we’d like to think that our minds are sharp enough to always make good decisions with the greatest efficiency, they just aren’t. ② In reality, the brain arrives at an intersection of four or five possible things to say and sits idling for a couple of seconds, considering the options. ③ Making a good decision helps you speak faster because it provides you with more time to come up with your responses. ④ When the brain stops sending navigational instructions back to  the  mouth and the mouth is moving too fast to pause, that’s when you get a verbal fender bender, otherwise known as filler.
⑤ Um, ah, you know, and like are what your mouth does when it has nowhere to go.






[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　Negotiation can be defined as an attempt to explore and reconcile conflicting positions in order to reach an acceptable outcome.
(A) Areas of difference can and do frequently remain,  and will perhaps be the subject of future negotiations, or indeed remain irreconcilable. In those instances in which the parties have highly antagonistic or polarised relations, the process is likely to be dominated by the exposition, very often in public, of the areas of conflict.
(B) In these and sometimes other forms of negotiation, negotiation serves functions other than reconciling conflicting interests. These will include delay, publicity, diverting attention or seeking intelligence about the other party and its negotiating position.
(C) Whatever the nature of the outcome, which may actually favour one party more than another, the purpose of negotiation is the identification of areas of common interest and conflict. In this sense, depending on the intentions of the parties, the areas of common interest may be clarified, refined and given negotiated form and substance.
* reconcile: 화해시키다  ** antagonistic: 적대적인
*** exposition: 설명

③ arises independently of the streets she travels on
④ tracks pretty closely with how she gets around
⑤ ties firmly in with how her city operates

① (A) － (C) － (B)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

② (B) － (A) － (C)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.





(A) Thus, she may prescribe the behavior to them by uttering the norm statement in a prescriptive manner. Alternately, she may communicate that conformity is desired in other ways, such as by gesturing. In addition, she may threaten to sanction them for not behaving as she wishes. This will cause some to conform to her wishes and act as she acts.
(B) But some others will not need to have the behavior prescribed to them. They will observe the regularity of behavior and decide on their own that they ought to conform. They may do so for either rational or moral reasons.
(C) Others may then conform to this behavior for a number of reasons. The person who performed the initial action may think that others ought to behave as she behaves in situations of this sort. [3점]
* sanction: 제재를 가하다
　
Misprints in a book or in any written message usually have a negative impact  on  the content,  sometimes (literally)  fatally. ( ① ) The displacement of a comma, for instance, may be a matter of life and death. ( ② ) Similarly most mutations have harmful consequences for the organism in which they occur, meaning that they reduce its reproductive fitness. ( ③ ) Occasionally, however, a mutation may occur that increases  the fitness of the organism, just as an accidental failure to reproduce the text of the first edition might provide more accurate or updated information. ( ④ )  A favorable mutation is going to be more heavily represented in the next generation, since the organism in which it occurred will have more offspring and mutations are transmitted to the offspring. ( ⑤ ) By contrast, there is no mechanism by which a book that accidentally corrects the mistakes of the first edition will tend to sell better. [3점]
* analogy: 유사 ** mutation: 돌연변이

① (A) － (C) － (B)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

② (B) － (A) － (C)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
40. 
다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?






[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Science is sometimes described as a winner-take-all contest, meaning that there are no rewards for being second or third. This is  an  extreme view  of the  nature of scientific contests. ( ① ) Even those who describe scientific contests in such a way note that it is a somewhat inaccurate description, given that replication and verification have social value and are common in science. ( ② ) It is also inaccurate to the extent  that it suggests that only a handful of contests exist. ( ③ ) But many other contests have multiple parts, and the number of such contests may be increasing. ( ④ ) By way of example,  for many years it was thought that there would be “one” cure









Exploring one scientific subject after another (A) remarkable work across the sciences, as the previously gained knowledge is retained in simplified forms within  the brain, which (B) room for new learning.

for cancer, but it is now realized that cancer takes multiple forms and that multiple approaches are needed to provide a cure.  (  ⑤ ) There won’t be one winner ― there will be many.
* replication:  반복  ** verification: 입증
(A) 
(B)
① enables …… leaves
③ delays  …… creates
⑤ invites …… diminishes
(A) 
(B)
② challenges …… spares
④ requires	…… removes



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	

[41～42] 다음  글을  읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)













(C)
(D)










41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① The Troubling Relationship Between Scientists and the Media
② A Scientist’s Choice: To Be Exposed to the Media or Not?
③ Scientists! Be Cautious When Talking to the Media
④ The Dilemma over Scientific Truth and Media Attention





43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

⑤ Who Are Responsible for Climate Issues, Scientists or the Media?

① (B) － (D) － (C)

② (C) － (B) － (D)

③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)

42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Emma와 Clara는 자전거 탈 준비를 일출 직후에 마쳤다.
② Clara는 자전거 타기와 수영이 꽤 비슷하다고 말했다.
③ Clara는 올림픽 수영 경기에서 메달을 땄다.
④ Emma와 Clara는 자전거를 타고 하얀 절벽 쪽으로 갔다.
⑤ Emma는 Clara의 침묵의 의미를 이해했다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


2017학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll work on the music, too.
② Okay. That’s a nice title for the video.
③ Fantastic. You did a great presentation.
④ I’m so sorry. I forgot to open the files.
⑤ No problem. I’ll watch them without subtitles.



2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I miss him, too. He’s my favorite teacher.
② When should we visit him in the hospital?
③ Don’t worry. Doctors say that he’s all right.
④ Why don’t we write a card and give it to him?
⑤ I’m afraid he’s not well enough to teach again.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 새로 출시된 음악 교육용 앱을 홍보하려고
② 음악 프로젝트의 결과물 제출 방법을 설명하려고
③ 컴퓨터 프로그램을 활용한 음악 수업을 소개하려고
④ 자기 주도 학습을 위한 스마트폰 활용을 권장하려고
⑤ 프로젝트용 태블릿 컴퓨터 사용 시 주의 사항을 안내하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 환기를 위해 겨울에도 교실 창문을 자주 열어야 한다.
② 학교 난방 온도를 조절하여 전기 요금을 절약해야 한다.
③ 학급 회의를 통해 교실 환경 개선 방안을 논의해야 한다.
④ 교실 공기의 질 개선을 위해 공기 청정기를 설치해야 한다.
⑤ 실내 미세 먼지 농도를 낮추기 위해 청소를 자주 해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 심리 상담사 - 상담 의뢰인
② 애완견 조련사 - 애완견 주인
③ 동물 보호소 직원 - 동물 입양 희망자
④ 산부인과 의사 - 신생아 아버지
⑤ 수의사 - 애견 카페 주인



7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 일식 장면 촬영하기
② 일식 시작 시간 알아보기
③ 일식 관측용 안경 주문하기
④ 비디오카메라 빌려오기
⑤ 일기 예보 확인하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 긴소매 셔츠를 입은 이유를 고르시오.
① 감기가 낫지 않아서
② 긁힌 상처를 보호하려고
③ 햇빛 알레르기가 있어서
④ 장시간 자전거를 타야 해서
⑤ 도서관의 실내 온도가 낮아서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $32	② $34	③ $36	④ $38	⑤ $40

10.대화를 듣고, Student Exchange Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 숙박 장소	② 활동 내용
③ 활동 기간	④ 참가 인원
⑤ 지원 방법

1.The 7th Kids’ Day in the Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일 치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 오후 1시부터 오후 5시까지 진행된다.
② 가장행렬과 함께 시작된다.
③ Rose Garden에서 춤과 공연을 즐길 수 있다.
④ 최신 장난감이 보물찾기의 상품으로 주어진다.
⑤ 기부금은 어린이 도서관 건립에 쓰인다.



2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  남자가  선택한  스노클링  세트
를 고르시오.

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Snorkeling Sets

①
②
③
④
⑤


13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry. The campaign is already over.
② Sure. More eyes will find more good spots.
③ All right. I’ll think about joining the campaign.
④ Never mind. I’d better go and finish my project.
⑤ I agree. Angles are important when taking selfies.

14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① That’s why I don’t let her eat cookies.
② You should’ve checked the tips in the article.
③ You need to calm down first and tell me why.
④ I’m sorry. I promise that I won’t tell a lie again.
⑤ I got it. I’ll keep that in mind next time she tells a lie.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Kate가  Troy에게  할  말로  가장  적절  한 것을 고르시오.
Kate:  	
① I think you should take the bus instead of a taxi.
② I’ll give you a ride to your office for today.
③ Let’s just hope the subway will move again.
④ The subway would be faster than the car.
⑤ You can use this new app to call a taxi.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① eating tips for increasing productivity
② ways to avoid eating unhealthy snacks
③ importance of having breakfast regularly
④ late night eating habits that lead to obesity
⑤ relationships between diet and mood change

17.언급된 식품이 아닌 것은?
① yogurt	② cereal	③ cheese	④ bananas ⑤ nuts







① 웹 사이트의 개인 정보 유출에 따른 대처법을 안내하려고
② 보안 강화를 위한 웹 사이트 임시 폐쇄를 공지하려고
③ 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 업그레이드를 권고하려고
④ 웹 사이트 회원의 주소 업데이트를 요청하려고
⑤ 네트워크 보안 서비스 업체를 홍보하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One time, my boss and I were sitting around the table and I pitched an idea about the trend of screenplays being published and sold as literature. My boss approved it. It was the first time she had given me the go­ahead to report and write a feature. It meant a lot to me that I’d possibly have my name on a longer piece. I felt so happy that I set about the work immediately. I wrote a draft, which was of course open to making revisions. My boss reviewed it and just said, “No, this isn’t working.” She didn’t say why or offer advice about how to fix it. I knew that the first draft wouldn’t be perfect; still, I wasn’t prepared for such an instant rejection. It was almost as if she drained my energy and enthusiasm.
① excited → disappointed	② irritated → sympathetic
③ depressed → pleased	④ frustrated → grateful
⑤ relaxed → jealous

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Suppose a child throws a ball to another child intending to start a game of catch. The other child is not watching and the ball hits the child on the head. The child cries and runs to tell the teacher about the aggressive behaviour of the other ‘naughty’ child. Of course the child who threw the ball is innocent but, if we have defined aggression in terms of pure behaviour, the consequences of an act, then the child who throws the ball is unfairly guilty. Clearly we need to take intention into account when we define aggression. We can now move to a more complete definition if we say that aggression is any behaviour that is intended to hurt others.
① 행동의 공격성을 판단할 때는 의도를 헤아려야 한다.
② 다툼이 발생하면 제삼자가 공정하게 중재해야 한다.
③ 잘못된 행동의 결과에 대한 책임을 져야 한다.
④ 운동할 때 안전을 최우선으로 고려해야 한다.
⑤ 어린이에게 협동의 중요성을 가르쳐야 한다.



영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A new development may take years to evolve. If people are only informed of a new proposal in its final stages, their role is often limited to the negative one of rejecting it. Their protests are then seen by planners and developers as an expensive nuisance, so the public become the ‘enemy’. Many people would like their voices to be heard from the initial stages of a proposed new development, instead of at the last stages of an application. Some architects and developers see this as a threat and insult to their professional skills, rather than a two­way process, beneficial to all parties. Of course the public cannot design a building, but its involvement at an early stage adds to the information available, and replaces a confrontational ‘them and us’ situation by a democratic process of participation and consultation. This situation is now changing as the importance of public consultation becomes increasingly recognised.
* nuisance: 골칫거리
① 주민 편의 시설의 설치를 위한 예산 확보가 시급하다.
② 건축물 개발의 초기 단계부터 대중의 참여가 필요하다.
③ 친환경 자재를 활용하는 것이 건축비 절감에 효과적이다.
④ 개발 과정에서 지역 주민 간 갈등이 심화하는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 거주자의 개별적 요구를 수용하는 건축 설계가 증가하고 있다.


2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Birds, as a whole group, are more sensitive to changes in their environment than other animals, so when they start falling off perches we should all be troubled. They are in the forward­most trench of nature’s resistance against the relentless attrition of environmental degradation. Our birds are nature’s early warning system and the scientists are telling us that if we don’t start acting on their distress signals, it won’t be long before the rest of the animal world is overrun as well. The populations of many species are declining rapidly because habitats are being destroyed or undermined, food sources are disappearing and, tricked by the increasingly weird and unstable weather, the birds’ migration and breeding patterns are changing. In short, birds are confused and under stress. Just because you can hear your robins, goldfinches, and sparrows chirping away happily in the garden every morning, don’t be fooled into thinking that all is well in ‘birdworld’.
* attrition: 소모
① controversies over how to preserve birds’ habitats
② changes in bird behavior due to the climate change
③ competition among bird species over limited food sources
④ necessity of paying close attention to the declining bird population
⑤ relationships	between	birds’	migration	and	breeding patterns

23.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Appealing though it might be to offload the responsibility for teaching our students basic knowledge to their elementary school teachers or to the Internet, the research of cognitive psychologists who study learning and the basic study habits of most students suggest that we cannot do this. One of our first and most important tasks as teachers is to help students develop a rich body of knowledge in our content areas ? without doing so, we handicap considerably their ability to engage in cognitive activities like thinking and evaluating and creating. As cognitive psychologist Daniel Willingham argued, you can’t think creatively about information unless you have information in your head to think about. “Research from cognitive science has shown,” he explained, “that the sorts of skills that teachers want for their students ? such as the ability to analyze and think critically ? require extensive factual knowledge.” We have to know things, in other words, to think critically about them.
① Critical Thinking: A Must for Creativity
② Factual Knowledge Is No Longer Required
③ Does Learning Happen Only in the Classroom?
④ Knowledge: A Cornerstone for Cognitive Activities
⑤ Physical Activities Enhance Cognitive Development



24.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The above graph shows what type of content a sample of 1,091 online consumers from 11 countries in 2016 tended to read or watch thoroughly, and what they tended to skim.
① The percentage of people who consumed videos thoroughly was the highest, followed by social media posts.
② Less than thirty percent of the respondents answered they read or watched blogs and podcasts thoroughly, respectively. ③ Blogs, social media posts, and news articles were top three contents which were most likely to be skimmed by online consumers. ④ Videos showed the largest percentage point gap between “Consume thoroughly” and “Skim,” whereas research content showed the smallest.
⑤ The percentage of respondents who consumed news articles thoroughly was more than twice that of respondents who consumed podcasts thoroughly.




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

25. Nicolas Appert에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Nicolas Appert was born in Ch?lons­sur­Marne, on the edge of France’s Champagne region, in 1749. He became an accomplished chef and served in the kitchens of various noblemen before setting up as a confectioner in Paris in 1781. In this line of work he was necessarily aware of the  use of sugar to preserve fruit, and he wondered whether it could be used to preserve other foods. As his interest in food preservation grew he began to experiment with storing food in sealed champagne bottles. In 1795 he moved to the village of Ivry­sur­Seine, where he began to offer preserved foods for sale, and in 1804 he set up a small factory to produce them. By this time some of his preserved food had been tested by the French navy, which was impressed by its quality. Appert had devised his methods solely  by experiment and had no idea why it worked.
* confectioner: 제과업자
① 뛰어난 요리사로 여러 귀족의 주방에서 일했다.
② 과일 보존에 설탕을 사용하는 것을 알았다.
③ 식품을 샴페인 병에 밀봉하여 저장하는 실험을 했다.
④ 1804년에 보존 식품 생산을 위한 작은 공장을 세웠다.
⑤ 식품 보존의 원리를 이해한 후 실험을 통해 확인했다.

26. Greenwoods Business Start­up Academy에 관한 다음 안내 문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 1주일 동안 창업에 관해 배운다.
② 9학년에서 12학년까지의 고등학생이 참가한다.
③ 숙박비는 참가비와 별도로 지불해야 한다.
④ 사업 계획 경진 대회가 마지막 날 열린다.
⑤ 참가 인원이 100명으로 제한되어 있다.
27. 
Root Garden Club에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 모든 연령의 아이들이 참여할 수 있다.
② 매달 두 번째 토요일에 수업이 진행된다.
③ 물을 주기 위해 텃밭을 매주 방문해야 한다.
④ 요리 수업과 원예 수업이 교대로 진행된다.
⑤ 요리 수업에 필요한 물품과 재료는 모두 제공된다.





28.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은?
　People seeking legal advice should be assured, when discussing their rights or obligations with a lawyer, ① which the latter will not disclose to third parties the information provided. Only if this duty of confidentiality is respected
② will people feel free to consult lawyers and provide the information required for the lawyer to prepare the client’s defense. Regardless of the type of information ③ disclosed, clients must be certain that it will not be used against them in a court of law, by the authorities or by any other party. It is generally considered to be a condition of the good functioning of the legal system and, thus, in the general interest. Legal professional privilege is ④ much more than an ordinary rule of evidence, limited in its application to the facts of a particular case. It is a fundamental condition on which the administration of justice as a whole ⑤ rests.
* confidentiality: 비밀 유지




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.(A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
　In literature as distinct from journalism, the ablest writers will never assume that the bare bones of a story can be
(A) enough / insufficient to win over their audience. They will not suppose that an attack or a flood or a theft must in and of itself carry some intrinsic degree of interest which will cause the reader to be appropriately moved or outraged. These writers know that no event, however shocking, can ever guarantee (B) detachment / involvement ; for this latter prize, they must work harder, practicing their distinctive craft, which means paying attention to language and keeping a tight rein on pace and structure. In certain situations, creative writers may even choose to (C) emphasize / sacrifice strict accuracy, and rather than feel that they are thereby carrying out a criminal act, they will instead understand that falsifications may occasionally need to be committed in the service of a goal higher still than accuracy.
(A) (B)	(C)

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. One characteristic of people who have achieved peace of mind is their independence. They trust their instincts. Nobody can tell them what to think if their inner voices say otherwise. Brendan O’Regan tells about a doctoral student who placed an ad in an Idaho newspaper asking if anyone within a 300­mile radius had experienced a remission. Twenty­five people replied. She noticed that many of them were farmer’s wives who had in common a strong faith in
 	. When she asked one of her interview subjects how she had felt when the doctor told her she had a terminal illness, the woman simply said, “I figured that was his opinion. We’re used to being told all these things by all these experts from the federal government who come in and look at the soil. They say ‘Don’t plant corn over there because it won’t grow,’ and you plant it and it grows beautifully. So you realize the experts don’t know everything. When the doctor told me I was going to die in six months, I said ‘What does he know, he’s only an expert!’”

* remission: (병의) 회복
① their own judgment	② their land and home
③ medical development	④ social security system
⑤ agricultural technology











30.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　A middle­aged man once asked a young mindfulness teacher for meditation instructions in plain language. He suggested that ① the man carve out five or ten minutes every day to sit comfortably or lie down and focus on his breathing. When thoughts came to mind, the young teacher told him to ignore them and go back to focusing on his breath. Although the middle­aged man remembered the instructions of ② his teacher, he couldn’t follow them. When his mind got busy, he was sucked into a mental loop of analyzing his problems. When ③ he wasn’t thinking, he’d get bored and zone out. Either way, ④ this hopeful new meditator didn’t feel that his time was well spent. When he was thinking and meditating, he figured he’d be better off sitting at his desk, and when he zoned out while meditating,
⑤ he figured he’d be better off daydreaming on a long chair in the backyard.
32. 
So closely is sniffing tied to odor perception that people routinely sniff when they are asked to imagine a smell. Without prompting, they take larger sniffs when imagining pleasant odors and smaller ones when imagining malodors. During visual imagery the eyes explore an imagined scene using the same scan paths made when viewing the actual visual scene. Preventing eye movements during visual imagery ? by having people stare at a stationary target ? reduces the quality of the image. Smell researcher Noam Sobel found that, similarly, imagined odors were more vivid when people could sniff than when they were wearing nose clips and unable to sniff. Actually sniffing increased the unpleasantness of an imagined bad smell (urine) and increased the pleasantness of a good one (flowers). Sniffing at an imaginary odor isn’t an absent­minded habit ? it’s a behavior that 	. [3점]
* malodor: 고약한 냄새
① enhances our mobility when we are in danger
② mixes various senses into an integrated image
③ compensates for the visual deficiency in the dark
④ improves the mental image we are trying to create
⑤ helps us relate ourselves with a particular natural object



6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3.People change over time, often for the better. Maturity,
wisdom, patience, and many other strengths can result from the gradual accumulation of life experiences. But do these qualities have to develop slowly? Researcher Timothy Carey and colleagues recently examined the idea that
 	. They conducted structured interviews with people who had just finished psychotherapy. Reports of aha moments abounded. One interviewee said that he could “visualize the point” at which he changed; another said, “I could actually hear it.” Many of them could identify the moment at which they had their realizations, such as in a swimming pool with a spouse or in a particular meeting with a therapist. Some used familiar metaphors to describe their ahas, such as a light being turned on, a button being pressed, a click, or a “‘ping’ and then it was like I could see things clearly.” Personal growth doesn’t have to be a glacial process. As physician­author Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., wrote, “A moment’s insight is sometimes worth a life’s experience.” [3점]
① human attention span is surprisingly short
② one’s strengths and weaknesses are not fixed
③ insights can be shortcuts to positive personal change
④ life experiences become more meaningful when shared
⑤ a single standard cannot measure one’s physical growth



34. Renewal and reform always depend on a capacity for going backwards to go forward. Key to this process is a search within one’s own mind for a model according to which reformed practice can be organized. Architects have long appealed to a primitive hut as just such a model. It is a structure thought to provide access as close to the first principles of architecture as it is possible to get, yet traces of this structure exist nowhere other than in the mind’s eye of the architect searching for it. Nonetheless, absence of the primitive hut from physical reality does little to diminish its importance for the renewal of present practices. If a desired (or required) thing resides in paradise, and no current map indicates its location, getting to it will only be possible via dreams and wishes. Reconstructions of it will necessarily be interpretations based on 	. Even though it is impossible to get there, returning to paradise nonetheless remains a reasonable destination for the memory, still able, by way of example, to fulfill its promise to the here and now. [3점]
① regularities within physical reality beyond the origin
② distortions due to the ignorance of evaluation models
③ varieties of geographical locations of modern structures
④ potentials that arise from the daring cutoff from the past practices
⑤ resemblances modeled after a non­existent object forever beyond our reach

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Large satellites for collecting solar power and transmitting it to the Earth have been the subject of much study. Their potential is vast indeed. ① The energy from the Sun that reaches the Earth over the course of just three days is equal to the energy in the fossil fuels needed to keep the human race supplied with power for 100 years at the present rate of consumption. ② Many engineering problems of transmitting the power back to the Earth remain unsolved, and it remains unclear if and when solar power will become commercially competitive. ③ A satellite of just 155 miles (250 km) in diameter could supply all of our present energy needs, assuming 10% overall efficiency, with a very low carbon footprint. ④ Solar panels in orbit are always in sunlight, they can always point directly at the Sun, and the radiation from the Sun is not reduced by atmospheric absorption. ⑤ As a result, the energy intake for cells in orbit is on average about ten times greater than that of terrestrial ones.

[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.

(A) To this extent, it can be claimed that most cultures, if not all of them, have both communal music­making where everyone participates and where the notion of musical talent is irrelevant, and special ritual and ceremonial music where only the specially talented and trained perform, and where the rest listen and participate as observers.
(B) In addition to such events, there was also communal music­making, especially at festivals such as the Winter Solstice, Harvest time, Spring time, and other secular celebrations where everyone participated. Music in the Christian church is similarly organised with communally sung hymns, anthems, and other liturgical items sung by the specially trained choir.
(C) That is, specially trained musicians performed and the audience was expected to contemplate the musical aesthetic as they listened. It is from this tradition that the instrumental and vocal forms of modern western music have evolved. [3점]
* secular: 세속적인 ** liturgical: 예배용의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(A) That’s because objects always have a positive amount of mass. There is no such thing as negative mass. It’s not like electric charge that comes in both positive and negative values.
(B) That’s why a brick is heavier than a balloon, heavier and harder to hold or move in opposition to the force of gravity. The force also depends on the distance between the objects: the greater the distance the weaker the force.
(C) The attraction gets weaker and weaker as the objects get further apart, but it never disappears altogether. The force never goes to zero. And it never pushes things away.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가 장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　The wheel has been around five thousand years, more or less, so archaeologists tell us. ( ① ) Someone of our forefathers early on noticed that a round log was easier to roll than to carry. ( ② ) The next step was to figure out that heavy objects could be moved by rolling them on three logs, keeping two logs under the load and shifting the log that rolled out the back up to the front. ( ③ ) The next step was to fit a platform on the axle in such a way that the axle stayed in one place and the wheels turned round and round. ( ④ ) This ancient inventor had thus invented the wagon that five thousand years later became a modern car. ( ⑤ ) The wheel business began, speculatively, in Mesopotamia and from there spread to the rest of the Old World ? Europe, Africa, and Asia.
* axle: (바퀴의) 굴대, 차축



40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　According to Johann Herbart, a German philosopher, ideas form as information from the senses combines. The term he used for ideas ? Vorsfellung? encompasses thoughts, mental images, and even emotional states. These make up the entire content of the mind, and Herbart saw them not as static but dynamic elements, able to move and interact with one another. ( ① ) Ideas, he said, can attract and combine with other ideas or feelings, or repulse them, rather like magnets. ( ② ) Similar ideas, such as a color and tone, attract each other and combine to form a more complex idea. ( ③ ) However, if two ideas are unalike, they may continue to exist without association. ( ④ ) This causes them to weaken over time, so that they eventually sink below the “threshold of consciousness.” ( ⑤ ) They repel one another with an energy that propels one of them beyond consciousness, into a place that Herbart referred to as “a state of tendency”; and we now know as “the unconscious.” [3점]
* repulse: 물리치다








?

(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① lack	··· significance	② lack	··· availability
③ reflect	··· accuracy	④ reflect  ··· significance
⑤ highlight ··· accuracy



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)







(C)









(D) 








41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Calculation Practice, No More in Demand Today
② How Fast Is Technology Improving Human Life?
③ Is Technology­Centered Design Suitable for Humans?
④ Displays Make Information Processing More Efficient
⑤ Information Age: A By­Product of Collective Intelligence

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Falling out	② Saving up	③ Keeping up
④ Paying back	⑤ Standing out

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Mark’s brother, Reuben, got a new coat, so Mom decided to make Mark’s winter coat out of Reuben’s old one. She took it apart carefully, cleaned and brushed the pieces and soon there was a nice new coat for Mark. He liked the coat very much, but he did want new buttons on it. But Mom said, “These are good buttons and look fine just as they did on Reuben’s coat.” He protested but when Mom had her mind made up, there was no point in wasting time trying to change it.




43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 엄마는 Reuben의 코트로 Mark의 겨울 코트를 만들었다.
② Nellie는 Mark의 코트에 달린 단추를 씹었다.
③ Mark는 달걀을 직접 가져오려고 헛간으로 갔다.
④ Reuben과 아빠는 Mark의 비명을 듣고 달려왔다.
⑤ 엄마는 Mark의 코트 단추를 결국 바꿔 주기로 했다.


2014학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역
7. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① No problem. I’ll reschedule it.
② I’m sorry, but the desk is sold out.
③ Sure. Do you want to get a refund now?
④ Why not? Our technician will fix it soon.
⑤ Wait a second. I’ll show you another model.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. I’ve already returned it.
② Sorry, but the book was checked out today.
③ Just remember you have to pay the late fee.
④ Oh my! I didn’t know the library was closed today.
⑤ You don’t have to. This one might be worth reading.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 채소 재배  상자의  사용을 권장하려고
② 채소 위주  식단의  장점을 설명하려고
③ 농작물 재배 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
④ 정원 가꾸기의  심리적  효과를 소개하려고
⑤ 겨울철 채소  섭취의  중요성을 강조하려고

4. 대화를 듣고 남자가 가족 모임에 참석하지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 지하철을  잘못 갈아타서
② 보고서  작성이 늦어져서
③ 컴퓨터를  수리해야 해서
④ 가방을 찾으러 가야 해서
⑤ 지하철 운행이 지연되어서
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 규칙적인 체육 활동이 성적 향상에 도움을 준다.
② 온라인 학습 환경이 개별화 수업에 효과적이다.
③ 명언을 인용하는 것이 주장의 설득력을  높인다.
④ 자신에게 맞는 학습 유형을 찾는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 성적 향상을 위해 구체적인 목표를 설정해야 한다.
6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 홈스테이 주인 - 유학생	② 부동산 중개인 - 고객
③ 상담 전문가 - 의뢰인	④ 여행가이드 - 관광객
⑤ 식당 종업원 - 손님






8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  바자회 일정 문의하기	② 신문 구독 신청하기
③  아이들 옷 정리하기	④ 기부할 책 고르기
⑤ 새 옷장 주문하기

9. 대화를 듣고, 배드민턴 동호회 선택 시 고려사항으로 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 집에서의 거리	②  회원들의 실력
③  강습 가능 여부	④  가입비의 유무
⑤ 실내경기 가능 여부

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $160	② $180	③ $200	④ $225	⑤ $250

11. The Scribblers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 12세부터 17세까지의 학생들로 구성되어 있다.
② 매주 만나서 뉴스와 책에 대해 토론한다.
③ 매달 동호회의 잡지를 발행한다.
④ 디자인을 제외한 전반적인 잡지 출판 과정에 참여한다.
⑤ 지역 작가들과 기자들로부터 도움을 받는다.
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]



①
②
③
④
⑤

1	8

2	영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
② Yes. I think I should say thank you to him.
③ He should have practiced driving more often.
④ I should think about what car is good for me.
⑤ Sure. That’s why he took me to play golf today.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① I’m afraid I can’t go to your house tomorrow.
② Sure. He’ll help you do your Chinese assignment.
③ What are friends for? It’ll be good for your career.
④ Thanks, but I can make an English version by myself.
⑤ Excellent! I hope it’ll help attract more Chinese tourists.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Dave의 엄마가 Dave에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Dave’s mother:  	

① Wait! Let’s clean the filter first before running it.
② How about turning on the air conditioner right now?
③ Thank you for showing me how to clean out the dust.
④ Be careful. It’s dangerous to play outside in this heat.
⑤ Sorry, but it’s too expensive to fix the air conditioner.




[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① positive effects of a well­balanced diet
② how to eliminate allergies through diet plans
③ ways to make wholesome homemade baby food
④ benefits of breastfeeding for mothers and babies
⑤ necessity for food intake control while breastfeeding

17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① onions	② coffee	③ cheese
④ cabbage	⑤ peanuts


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Honor your children in celebration of their birthdays or in recognition of their accomplishments by donating a book through the Williams Book Club. You can support our library by immediately adding a new book to its holdings. Diane Jordan, Williams’ Media Specialist, has put together a wish list of books based in part on suggestions from students. Library bound books generally cost $15 or $20. You have the choice to donate either of those amounts. Mrs. Jordan will purchase a book from the list with your monetary donation. Your gift book will have a personalized label inside stating that it was given to Williams Middle School in honor of your child. Your child’s name will be mentioned during the morning show’s Book Club Highlights and the gift book will be placed in a special section of the Media Center featuring Book Club books. If you have questions about the books, please contact Mrs. Jordan at d.jordan@williamsbookclub.com, or phone at 1-800-456-4959.
① 독서 클럽 가입 절차를 안내하려고
② 온라인 도서 구매 방법을 알려주려고
③ 변경된 도서관 이용 방법을 공지하려고
④ 구입 희망 도서 목록 작성을 요청하려고
⑤ 도서 기부를 위한 모금 참여를 권장하려고





19. 다음  글의 요지로  가장 적절한 것은?
 “Where there’s a will with power, there’s  a way.”  The way comes after the will with power. You must be hungry enough, strong enough, resilient enough, to desire change and make change happen. You’ve got the will with power, so now you can define your course. Your course is critical. But there is not any one course for any one journey.  A wise person once told me that what’s important is not so much the path you’re on as the direction you’re headed. You may get bumped off your path, pushed this way and that, but if your direction is true, your journey  will  be true. A roadblock may require a change of path, but your destination remains the same. So what is your way?  It is the path you define, day by day, to get you to your dream. It takes will power to define your way.

① 의지력을 가지고 목표를 향해 나아가야 한다.
②  치밀한  계획을  통해서  다양한  변수에  대비해야 한다.
③  자신의  내면을  성찰하는  시간을  충분히  가져야 한다.
④ 역경에 직면했을 때 전문가의 조언을 얻는 것이 필요하다.
⑤ 목표 성취를 위해 자신의 목표를 주변 사람들에게 알려야 한다.



2	8

영어 영역	3

20. 다음 글에 나타난 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 A planning discussion can be fairly complex and fast­paced, causing us to forget things. Take the time to summarize what’s supposed to happen. It could sound something like this: “Let me see if I got this right. Bill, you’ll get the nine copies of the report, stapled with a standard company cover sheet, for the meeting Tuesday at 2 p.m. Is that right?” Bill would probably say, “Right,” and then you could ask him whether there is anything else that you haven’t talked about that might cause a problem. When you ask for the other person’s input, it can help bring to light issues that might otherwise cause problems. However, the real power of this question goes far beyond clarifying understanding. You’re checking for commitment. When the other person eventually says, “I’ll do it,” that person is much more likely to live up to the agreement. Never walk away from a crucial confrontation satisfied with a vague nod. If you care about gaining genuine commitment, give the other person the opportunity to say yes to a very specific agreement.

① 명확한 업무 확인 과정을 통해 상대방의 책무성을 높여라.
② 업무상의 실수에 대해서 관대한 태도를 지녀라.
③ 장기적인 안목을 가지고 업무 계획을 세워라.
④ 지속적인 대화와 이해를 통해 갈등 관계를 해결해라.
⑤ 업무 배정 시 직원들의 업무 능력을 충분히 고려해라.


21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
 People’s preferences affect decisions about consumption and trade. Not only is there variation in preference across people, but there also is variation based on how much has already been consumed. For example, you might get a lot of pleasure from drinking a cup of coffee in the morning, and be willing to trade $3 for that coffee. But, after finishing that first cup of coffee, the second cup of coffee might not be quite as valuable to you. At some point, you will have had so much coffee that you’re not willing to part with $3 to get another cup. Economists often use the generic term “utility” to refer to the pleasure, value, or usefulness of something that is consumed or experienced. In this example, then, you are making a decision about whether the utility of another cup of coffee is greater than the utility of having $3 to spend on something else.

① independent factors in price­making
② causes of unreasonable consumption
③ the consequences of compulsive consumption
④ limitations of comparing the values of two options
⑤ the influence of diminishing utility on purchase decisions
22. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 It’s no coincidence that some people are just like their dogs. Researchers in Bath, England, conducted an online survey of 1,000 dog owners and found that certain human personality traits link to specific canines. The research claims that if you own a German Shepherd, you’re most likely outgoing. Got a Golden Retriever? Odds are you’re conscientious. A Chihuahua? Research says you’re agreeable. “It seems likely that personality types are subconsciously drawn to certain breeds,” reported study author Lance Workman in a British Psychological Society news release. The study indicates that you may be able to predict someone’s personality based on his or her dog of choice. Of course, lifestyle plays a part too. For example, according to Workman, more active individuals are better suited to athletic, pastoral breeds such as Border Collies, while those who are considered emotionally stable might be suited to hound dogs such as Beagles or Greyhounds.

① Just Stick to Your Belief!
② What Your Dog Says about You
③ Popular Misconceptions about Dogs
④ Dogs: The Cure for a Broken Heart
⑤ Which Animal Would Make a Good Pet?







23. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 A friend of mine mentioned last week that he once bought a Frankies chicken and he discovered after getting home that it was all dry and nasty. ① He took it back to the store and got an immediate refund. Then he decided to write to Walter Robinson, the CEO of Frankies Chickens, and tell ② him that he had bought one of his quality chickens and it was all dry and nasty. By return mail he got a letter from Walter that not only included lengthy apologies and a certificate for a free chicken, but that also asked for ③ his help to make sure it never happened again by asking a whole list of specific questions: Where did he buy it? When? Exactly what was wrong? What did ④ he think had happened? What exactly did the store say when he returned it? Two days later an executive of Frankies Chickens called to make sure ⑤ he had received the letter, to make sure that all was well, and to ask some more specific questions. My friend will never buy anything but Frankies chicken.


3	8

4	영어 영역

24. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
 Not many years ago, schoolchildren were taught that carbon dioxide is the ① naturally occurring lifeblood of plants, just as oxygen is ours. Today, children are more likely to think of carbon dioxide as a poison. That’s because the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere ② has increased substantially over the past one hundred years, from about 280 parts per million to
380. But what people don’t know is that the carbon dioxide level some 80 million years ago ― back when our mammalian ancestors were evolving ― ③ to be at least 1,000 parts per million. In fact, that is the concentration of carbon dioxide you regularly breathe if you work in a new energy­efficient office building, for ④ that is the level established by the engineering group that sets standards for heating and ventilation systems. So not only ⑤ is carbon dioxide plainly not poisonous, but changes in carbon dioxide levels don’t necessarily mirror human activity. Nor has atmospheric carbon dioxide necessarily been the trigger for global warming historically.
25. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
 Whether an animal can feel anything resembling the loneliness humans feel is hard to say. However, highly social animals, such as certain types of parrot, seem to be ① adversely affected when kept alone. Some parrots will engage in bizarre behaviors and can severely harm themselves. Some large parrots will even seem to go insane if subjected to long periods of ② isolation. On the other hand, certain animals that are by nature ③ solitary hardly appear to be affected at all. Some fish, in particular some types of cichlids, will even ④ fight viciously with their own kind if more than one is kept in an aquarium. Guam rails, a kind of flightless bird, are ⑤ tolerant of their own kind, which has obviously made breeding them in captivity very difficult.

26. 다음 글에 드러난 Joseph Bell의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Joseph Bell was a top­class violinist in the world. One day a reporter suggested an experiment to Joseph for a newspaper cover story designed to test Joseph’s musical ability to influence people. But there was one condition: people should not know who he was. Joseph was sure of his musical ability to touch others’ hearts and accepted his proposal without hesitation. On a Friday morning at rush hour, Joseph took his Stradivarius violin, for which he’d paid more than $3 million, and headed to the L’Enfant plaza subway stop in Washington, D.C. He set up shop between an entrance and an escalator, opened his violin case to take donations, seeded it with $20 of his own, and began to perform several complex classical pieces expecting himself surrounded by many pedestrians in a minute. Over the course of his forty­three­minute performance, more than one thousand people passed within a few feet of him. Among them, only one stopped to listen. As time went by, the violin sound faded and he slowly packed up walking away with only $1 earned.
① excited → envious	② anxious → proud
③ despaired → delighted ④ regretful → relieved
⑤ confident → disappointed
27. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Despite the conventional wisdom of some management trainers that group brainstorming is an effective way of generating ideas, more objective research has recently suggested otherwise. ① People working in groups often produce ideas that are fewer in number and lower in quality than the same individuals working for a period alone. ② When people engaging in group problem­solving share their thoughts and information too quickly, none of them has a chance to develop an independent viewpoint before it is subject to influence by the thoughts and experiences of others. ③ People participating in brainstorming build their solutions on the ideas of others, “think them up” and improve them, and this synergy effect allows that better and better ideas are generated. ④ Under such conditions, it has been shown that people tend to converge too rapidly on a solution, or at least on an agreed way of conceptualizing the problem, that may be less than optimal. ⑤ When you insert periods of more solitary thinking between the discussions, you tend to get higher­quality ideas and solutions.
28. 26th Annual Buckeye Book Fair에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



① 작가와 삽화가를 만날 수 있다.
② 입장료는 박람회를  위한  비용으로 사용된다.
③ 어린이들에게 동물 탐구 이벤트를 제공한다.
④ 입장권을 제시하면 무료 주차가 가능하다.
⑤ 집에서 가져온 책에 저자의 사인을 받을 수 있다.


4	8

영어 영역	5

29. Brian Boyle에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
 In 2004, an eighteen­year­old competitive swimmer, Brian Boyle, had to be brought back to life eight times after a dump truck slammed into his car on his way home from swim practice. The force of the horrific crash damaged every major organ in his body. Doctors predicted he would not survive, let alone walk again. But, miraculously, Brian clawed his way back to the living and gradually recovered. In 2007, Brian Boyle staged what many consider to be one of the greatest comebacks in sports history when he crossed the finish line at the Hawaii Ironman just three years after leaving the Intensive Care Unit. In 2009, he published his first book, Iron Heart, and he was presented the Spokesperson of the Year Award from the American Red Cross for his contributions. In 2010, he graduated Cum Laude from St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and also made his very first blood donation at the hospital that brought him back to life. Brian now dedicates his life to competing in triathlons and giving back to the donors who saved him.
* Cum Laude: 우등으로

① 수영 연습을 하러 가는 길에 교통사고를 당했다.
② Hawaii Ironman에 참가하였으나 완주하지는 못했다.
③ 미국 적십자사로부터 상을 받았다.
④ 건강 악화로 대학을 졸업하지 못했다.
⑤ 현재 트라이애슬론 경기에 참가하지 않고 있다.





30. blue sea slug에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 The blue sea slug is a strange­looking marine creature found in the temperate and tropical waters of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans. With the aid of a gas­filled sac in its stomach, the blue sea slug floats at the surface. Due to the location of the gas sac, the blue sea slug floats upside down. They live a pelagic life ― this means they go where the winds and currents take them. Blue sea slugs feed mainly on hydrozoans although they are also known to eat the flesh of their own kind. One of the specialities of their diet is the highly poisonous Portuguese Man­O­War. The blue sea slug can not only swallow its prey’s stinging cells without hurting itself, but also store the swallowed poison inside the up to 84 finger­like structures sticking out of its body, and then use this poison to defend itself against other predators. The blue sea slug is a hermaphrodite, having both male and female reproductive organs.
* hydrozoans: 히드로충류
① 온대 수역과 열대 수역에 서식한다.
② 몸을 뒤집은 상태로 물 표면을 떠다닌다.
③ 동족의 살을 먹기도 하는 것으로 알려져 있다.
④ 독성이  있는 먹이는  삼키지 않는다.
⑤ 암수의  생식기를  모두 가지고 있다.
31. 
다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?









 This graph shows activity rates for three age groups from five countries in 2010. The activity rate represents the proportion of the labor force population to the population of working age. ① The age groups consist of 15­24, 25­54, and 55­64, with the core group of 25­54 showing the highest activity rate for each country. ② The 15­24 group shows the lowest rate in each country. ③ In France and the United Kingdom, the gaps between the 15­24 and 55­64 age groups show just 1%, but the gap between Korea’s 15­24 and 55­64 groups shows the greatest contrast. ④ The percentage of Germany’s 25­54 age group is 10% less than that of Korea’s.
⑤ Italy has the smallest percentage among the five countries’ 55­64 age groups.





[32~33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

32. In a penalty situation in soccer, the ball takes less than 0.3 seconds to travel from the player who kicks the ball to the goal. There is not enough time for the goalkeeper to watch the ball’s trajectory. He must make a decision before the ball is kicked. Soccer players who take penalty kicks shoot one third of the time at the middle of the goal, one third of the time at the left, and one third of the time at the right. Surely goalkeepers have spotted this, but what do they do? They dive either to the left or to the right. Rarely do they stay standing in the middle ― even though roughly a third of all balls land there. Why would they jeopardize saving these penalties? The simple answer:
 	. It looks more impressive and feels less embarrassing to dive to the wrong side than to freeze on the spot and watch the ball sail past. [3점]

① agility	② appearance	③ indecision
④ accuracy	⑤ impatience

5	8

6	영어 영역

33. Recalling childhood memories can 	, according  to  a study  published  in April  in the Journal                  of Personalityand  Social  Psychology. In  a  series   of experiments  done  by Francesca Gino and Sreedhari Desai of Harvard University, participants were more likely  to  help the  experimenters with  an   extra   task,   judge   immoral behavior  harshly, and donate money to charity when they had actively remembered their childhood. The effect held whether the memories were positive or negative ― although, notably, the study subjects did not have traumatic histories. These recollections seem to summon a heightened sense of moral purity. Youngsters may or may not behave especially ethically, but childhood tends to connote innocence ― a frame of mind that affects behavior. “It’s promising research in thinking about ways in which people are following their moral compass with very simple interventions,” Gino says.

① lessen separation anxiety effectively
② lead people to behave more ethically
③ help people overcome behavioral disorder
④ be accompanied by feelings of uncertainty
⑤ boost one’s sense of happiness temporarily



[34~35] 다음 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

34. Imagine that you are French. You are walking along a busy pavement in Paris and another pedestrian is approaching from the opposite direction. A collision will occur unless you each move out of the other’s way. Which way do you step? The answer is almost certainly to the right. Replay the same scene in many parts of Asia, however, and you would probably move to the left. There is no instruction to head in a specific direction. Mehdi Moussaid says this is a behavior brought about by (A) . If two opposing people guess each other’s intentions correctly, each moving to one side and allowing the other past, then they are likely to choose to move the same way the next time they need to avoid a collision. The chance of a successful maneuver increases as more and more people adopt a bias in one direction, until the tendency sticks. Whether it’s right or left does not matter; what does is that it is the unspoken will of the (B) . [3점]

(A) (B)
①  probabilities	……	authority
②  probabilities	……	majority
③  personalities	……	authority
④  personalities	……	majority
⑤  efficiencies	……	conscience
35. 
Even the best journalists can be tricked by lies into presenting misleading news. Sometimes the lies are unconscious. Informants can think they are telling the truth but are really fooling themselves. They may report seeing what they wanted to see. (A) , they report seeing a policeman arresting a youth when he was, in fact, giving the youth directions. You must check the facts, both for your own sake and for the sake of your informants, who would not wish to appear foolish.  Sometimes,  (B)  ,  the  informant is deliberately trying to trick you for his or her own reasons. Perhaps it is to cover up a mistake, perhaps to avoid appearing ignorant, occasionally to give false information for more sinister reasons, such as creating ill­feeling between groups or tricking people into giving money.


(A)

(B)
①
For example
……
however
②
For example
……
as a result
③
Nevertheless
……
similarly
④
Nevertheless
……
in fact
⑤
Furthermore
……
by contrast


[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

36. 
 Competition can be extremely healthy. It drives us to improve, to reach and stretch. Without it, we would never know how far we could push ourselves. In the business world, it makes our economy prosper.

(A) The difference is this: Competition is healthy when you compete against yourself, or when it challenges you to reach and stretch and become your best. Competition becomes dark when you tie your self­worth into winning or when you use it as a way to place yourself above another.
(B) Later, Luke confronts the evil Darth Vader and learns about the “dark side” of the force. As Darth puts it, “You don’t know the power of the dark side.” So it is with competition. There is a sunny side and a dark side, and both are powerful.
(C) But there is another side to competition that isn’t so nice. In the movie Star Wars, Luke Skywalker learns about the positive energy shield called “the force,” which gives life to all things.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


6	8

영어 영역	7
37.	39.




(A) This strategy allows us to exploit a property of networks even if we cannot see the whole structure. Acquaintances have more links and are more central to the network than are the randomly chosen people who named them.
(B) To prevent measles epidemics, for example, 95 percent of the population must be immunized. A more efficient alternative is to target the hubs of the network, namely, those people at the center of the network or those with the most contacts.
(C) However, it is often not possible to discern network ties in advance in a population when trying to figure out how best to immunize it. A creative alternative is to immunize the acquaintances of randomly selected individuals. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.



 Whatever the benefit to a virus of a long­lived host, there is no guarantee that hosts have mechanisms for increasing longevity that the virus could exploit. Nor need host longevity be an advantage. ( ① ) The interests of the virus depend on its life­cycle strategy, and some viruses are only released on the death of the host. ( ② ) In fact, many parasites actually force their host to attack other potential hosts or to be killed or eaten so that the parasites are passed on. ( ③ ) In some ways, this can be seen as a form of life extension because removing the germs could have drastic, possibly fatal effects on the host. ( ④ ) Extreme examples include endosymbiont root fungi in orchids, or mitochondria in our cells. ( ⑤ ) Without them, orchids and humans would not survive. [3점]
* parasitic: 기생하는 **endosymbiont: 다른 생물의 체내에 공생하는



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

38.
All participants were equally accurate, but the older group responded more slowly.
Older adults often take longer to make a decision than

young adults do. But that does not mean they are any less sharp. ( ① ) According to research at Ohio State University, the slower response time of older adults has more to do with prizing accuracy over speed. ( ② ) In the study, published recently in the Journal of ExperimentalPsychology:General,college­age students and adults aged
60 to 90 performed timed tests of word recognition and recall. ( ③ ) When the researchers encouraged them to work faster, however, they were able to match the youngsters’ speed without significantly sacrificing accuracy. ( ④ ) “In many simple tasks, the elderly take longer mainly because they decide to require more evidence to make their decision,” says co­author Roger Ratcliff. ( ⑤ ) When an older mind faces a task that requires speed, he says, a conscious effort to work faster can often do the trick.








?


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① provider …… temporary	② provider …… consistent
③ form	…… temporary	④ length	…… immediate
⑤ form	…… consistent


7	8

8	영어 영역

[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)
 It had gone about a thousand yards when it suddenly ground to a halt. The band stopped playing, the crowd stopped cheering. Everyone gazed in wonder as the train slowly backed up and returned to the station. It seemed an eternity until the doors opened and the men started to file out. Someone shouted, “It’s the armistice. The war is over.” For a moment, nobody moved, but then the people heard someone bark orders at the soldiers. My uncle walked down the steps and paraded down the street with other soldiers, as a returning hero, to be welcomed home by the assembled crowd. The next day he returned to (b) his job.
(C)
 One day, the inevitable happened and my uncle Milton received his draft notice. My grandparents were very upset, but my mother, his little sister was thrilled. She was ten years old and my uncle, realizing how (c) he was regarded by his little sister and all of her friends, went out and  bought them all service pins as gifts, which meant that they had a loved one in the service. All the little girls were delighted. When the day came for (d) him to leave, his  whole regiment, in their uniforms, left together from the same train station.	* draft: 징병 ** regiment: [군사] 연대
(D) 


41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Busy Is Better Than Bored
② Focus on What You Can Do Best
③ Success Lies in What You Believe
④ Just Put Yourself in Others’ Shoes
⑤ Monetary Reward: Your Top Priority?



42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① natural talents
② sense of humor
③ communication skills
④  investment strategies
⑤ emotional intelligence



[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
 My grandfather came from Hungary, and was educated in Germany. He was the only one in his family to come to the United States. He still had relatives living in Europe. When the first World War broke out,  he lamented the fact that if my uncle, his only son, had to go, it would mean that (a) he might fight against his cousins.
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 my uncle에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지가 독일에서 교육을 받았다.
② 탑승한 기차가 출발 후 갑자기 멈추었다.
③ 군인들과 함께 거리를 행진했다.
④ 여동생에게  선물을 사주었다.
⑤ 단기간의  군사훈련을 받았다.


8	8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지	1



6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No,  thanks.  I  don’t  like pizza.
② Right.  We  can  use  it anytime.
③ Yes. You can get it from a store.
④ It’s okay. You’ll do better next time.
⑤ Sure. You need to download the app first.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll try it.
② Actually, I was too sick.
③ Luckily, I got a high score.
④ Sorry. But I can’t teach you.
⑤ Well, I bought a birthday card.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 직원 채용을 안내하려고
② 화산의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 야생 동물 보호를 호소하려고
④ 모험 여행 참가자를 모집하려고
⑤ 전통 음식의 우수성을 홍보하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청소년기 교우 관계의 특성
② 대화 시 언어 선택의 중요성
③ 규칙적인 운동과 건강의 상관관계
④ 봉사 활동이 청소년에게 미치는 영향
⑤ 부모와 십 대 자녀 간의 갈등 해소 방법


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행원 － 고객	② 아파트 주민 － 경비원
③ 호텔 지배인 － 투숙객	④ 항공기 승무원 － 탑승객
⑤ 편의점 직원 － 택배 기사



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to revise the script of the play
② to make a poster for the concert
③ to change the design of a costume
④ to build the stage for the musical
⑤ to confirm the rehearsal schedule

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 작년에 병원에 입원했던 이유를 고르시오.
① 상한 우유를 마셔서	② 과식으로 배탈이 나서
③ 독성 식물을 만져서	④ 임상 실험에 참여하려고
⑤ 건강 검진을 받기 위해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $140	② $180	③ $200	④ $252	⑤ $280

10. 대화를 듣고, 슬라이드 자료에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 디자인	② 글자 크기	③ 음향 효과
④ 사진	⑤ 도표

11. Global  in  Action에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 기관이다.
② 전직 테니스 선수가 설립했다.
③ 1,000명 이상의 회원이 있다.
④ 집 짓는 일을 도와준다.
⑤ 재정적 기부를 받지 않는다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 방과 후 프로그램을 고르시오.




①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Sorry. I can’t work the night shift.
② No worries. I’ll go to the music store.
③ Definitely. He’ll move in with me soon.
④ Sure. I’ll tell him not to practice late at night.
⑤ That’s okay. He won’t mind playing the guitar.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Don’t worry. I can reserve the seats right away.
② Too bad. I was hoping you could join us.
③ Well done! Now we can enjoy our trip.
④ You’re right. I’d rather take the next flight.
⑤ Thanks. I had a really good time at the festival.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Allison에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu: Allison,   	
① I’ll hand in your paper for you.
② I can help you correct the errors.
③ I can research the Joseon Dynasty.
④ you should watch a historical movie.
⑤ you should buy an English dictionary.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① tips for a safe hiking trip
② advice for traveling at night
③ qualifications for a park ranger
④ finding shelter in the mountains
⑤ arranging group tours in the wild

17. 고려할 사항으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① weather	② clothing	③ food
④ first aid kit	⑤ emergency supplies
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

If you’re one of the countless people whose mind and body have been overworked, you need a program that
will give you a more positive and energetic life: the Health Management Program offered by the ABC Well-Being Institute. This  program  lasts  for  six  weeks and consists of three different  components:  Daily Targets, Walking  Plans,  and  Eating  Plans.  Each week, you’ll be advised by our  health  experts  and introduced to new physical activity  targets.  Are you serious about improving your life immediately? Then, you can start by enrolling in our fantastic  program today.

① 스포츠 센터 강사를 모집하려고
② 건강관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 걷기 운동의 효과를 강조하려고
④ 스트레스의 위험성을 경고하려고
⑤ 약물 남용의 부작용을 설명하려고




19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Everybody has moments of doubt  about  something  or  other from time to time; it  is  a  natural  process.  The challenge is  not  to  let  those  moments  accumulate  and affect your self-belief. You  will  always  face  the  challenge  of  other  people’s  comments  and  opinion.  There  are   people that you feel good being  around  and  others  you  don’t.  Some  people  give  you  positive  energy  because   they believe in you. You feel  it  and  you  rise  to  the occasion. Others may always have a negative comment to make  about  what  you  are  doing  or  talking  about.  Don’t  let these comments rock your  self-belief.  Always  question  the person’s  reason  for  the  comment.  If  it  is  based  on  fact, you  should  listen;  if  not,  then  it  is  only  their  opinion. You will need to stay strong.
* rise to the occasion: 위기 상황에서 능력을 발휘하다
① 인맥이 넓은 사람들과 교제하라.
② 성공하기 위해 도전적인 자세를 가지라.
③ 일시적 감정으로 타인을 비판하지 말라.
④ 좌절감을 느낄 때는 성공한 경험을 생각하라.
⑤ 선별적인 의견 수용으로 자기 확신이 흔들리지 않게 하라.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


20. 다음 글에 드러난 Delia의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Delia stepped out  of  the  front  door  of  her  house, and  the  day welcomed her with a warm and sunny  smile.  With  each step, she thought, “I can’t   wait   for  today’s  class.”   Her  family had recently moved  into  the  neighborhood,  and  the  new school  year  had  just  begun  at  Elanova  High  School.  Her new school offered ballet lessons, and Delia eagerly signed up. She was one step closer to fulfilling her lifelong  dream of becoming a ballerina. Delia sat at the bench  waiting for the school bus. As the bus rolled down Madison Avenue, she slipped her hand into her ballet bag to touch  her new shoes. She thought about working hard  on her leaps and jumps. “I want to soar to the moon,” Delia thought.
① hopeful	② bored	③ relaxed
④ worried	⑤ scared

21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One reason many people keep  delaying  things  they  should do is that they fear they will do them wrong or  poorly, so   they just don’t do them at all. For example, one of the best ways to write a book is to write it as quickly as possible, getting your thoughts onto paper without regard to  style.  Then, you can  go  back  to  revise  and  polish  your  writing.  If I only wrote when  I  knew  it  would  be  perfect,  I’d  still be working on my first book! Do you have a hard time  relaxing if your house is a mess? Do you beat yourself up      for making mistakes? I’ve got a simple message for  you  today: It’s time to let go of your perfectionism. It becomes       a stumbling block that keeps you stuck.
① 잦은 실수는 큰 실수를 유발한다.
② 주변을 정리하는 습관이 중요하다.
③ 책을 집필하기 위해서는 인내가 필요하다.
④ 완벽주의는 일을 추진하는 데 방해가 된다.
⑤ 타인의 입장에서 생각하는 것이 바람직하다.

22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Textiles and clothing have functions that go beyond just protecting the body. Dress and textiles alike are used as a means  of  nonverbal  communication.   Obvious   examples  would be the use of uniforms to communicate  a  particular  social role and the modern white  wedding dress Western cultures use to mark this rite of passage. Both types of clothing communicate important information nonverbally  to the onlooker. The female wearing  the  white  dress  is about  to be married and change her status and role  in  society.  The  person in the uniform has some specialized   function  in  society, such as police officer, nurse, or soldier. Therefore,  it  can be said that clothing visually communicates information  about group membership and functions as an identity marker.
① educational functions of uniforms
② ways to diversify styles of clothing
③ gender differences in choosing clothing
④ different cultural norms of Western society
⑤ nonverbal communicative functions of clothing
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Traditional consumption was  not particularly thrifty. The concept of thrift emerged out  of a more  affluent  money  culture. In traditional societies  where  resources  continued  to  be scarce,  consumption  was more seasonally  and communally orientated. In years of bountiful crops people ate heartily, and in lean years they starved. People were not particularly motivated to produce more goods for  stockpiling, as there was  little  incentive   to  do  so  where  there was little security from raids. When times were good, celebrations of  gluttony  were   held  in  the  winter  season  when stocks could not be refilled. These rituals were more important than the potential hardships such  celebrations might later bring, as they served to bind people together and distribute resources. Holiday rituals were typically structured around cultural practices such as song, dance, theater, and feasting, and took a great deal of time away from work.
* affluent: 풍부한
** gluttony: 폭식
① What Motivated Traditional Consumption?
② Communal Production of Winter Foods
③ Refilling Stocks: A Survival Necessity
④ How to Survive after a Bad Harvest
⑤ What Constitutes Holiday Rituals?

24. Stonehenge Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
STONEHENGE TOUR
The great and ancient stone circle of Stonehenge is one of the  greatest wonders of the world.
Enjoy the stones with a fascinating audio-guided tour, in the language of your choice!
Included Highlights
?Express  Service  to  Stonehenge  by  Luxury  Bus
?Stonehenge  Guidebook
Prices   &  Bus Departures
?Adults:  ?44.00	Children (3-12):  ?39.00 Seniors (60 and over) / Students: ?42.00
?Days:  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday
?Times  &  Places:  10:00 am,  Royal  National  Hotel
11:00 am, Victoria Station
To secure your seat, please arrive at  least  15  minutes  prior to departure or book online 24 hours in advance.
① audio  guide는 영어로만 제공된다.
② Stonehenge  안내서는 제공되지 않는다.
③ 60세 이상의 노인들은 무료이다.
④ 버스는 오전에만 출발한다.
⑤ 좌석 확보는 온라인 예약으로만 가능하다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Kids Library Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Kids Library Camp Premont Library
(July 29 & 30, 2015)
★ A 2-day camp for  children  aged  6  and  over (Children under 6 must be accompanied by an adult.)
★ Time: 1:00 pm - 6:00 pm, on both days
★ Learn How To:
- use library facilities
- produce online videos
- create your own story books
?Spaces  are  limited,  so  advance  registration  is  required. Registrations are accepted only at www.premont.lib.
?No  registration  fee
?For  further  details,  contact  Ms.  Huggon
at huggon@premont.lib or (877) 123-4567.

① 6세 미만의 어린이는 어른을 동반해야 한다.
② 캠프는 오후에 진행된다.
③ 도서관 시설의 이용 방법을 배운다.
④ 캠프 참가 사전 등록이 필요하다.
⑤ 캠프 등록비를 내야 한다.

26. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?












　The pie charts above  show  the  Breakdown  of  Solid Waste, particularly focusing  on  Domestic  Waste,  of  the  state of New South Wales, Australia.  ① With  regard  to  Total Urban Solid Waste, the percentage of Commercial & Industrial is more  than  twice  as  high  as  that  of Construction & Demolition. ② The Domestic  category  makes up about a third of Total Urban Solid Waste. ③ Of Domestic Waste, Food & Garden accounts for the highest percentage, while the percentage of Ferrous is the lowest.
④ Other Waste is 15% of Domestic Waste, which is  five times higher than  the  percentage  of  Plastics.  ⑤ Diapers  and Glass each are less than  five  percent  of  Domestic  Waste.
* ferrous: 철(쇠)의
27. 
living rock cactus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Living rock cactus is one of the most peculiar plants found in the desert. For  most  of  the  year,  it  blends  into the rocky limestone soils of the Dead Horse Mountains,
Mariscal Mountain, and the  hills  along  the  Rio  Grande.  You may step on one before  you  notice  it.  Spineless  and  flat against the ground,  it  has  triangular  tubercles  that overlap in a star-shaped pattern. In extremely dry conditions, living rock cactus  is  almost  invisible:  it  literally  shrinks  into the surrounding rocky soil. Moisture is  stored  in  the  root, and during droughts the  root  shrinks,  dragging  the  stem underground. These spineless plants  survive  by  blending  into  their  native  habitat.  As  added  protection, they  store  foul-tasting,  poisonous  alkaloids  in  their  bodies.
* limestone: 석회암
** tubercle:  작은 돌기
① 사막에서 발견되는 특이한 식물 중 하나이다.
② 삼각형 모양의 작은 돌기를 가지고 있다.
③ 매우 건조한 조건에서는 눈에 거의 보이지 않는다.
④ 가뭄 기간에는 뿌리가 팽창한다.
⑤ 독성이 있는 알칼로이드를 체내에 저장한다.






28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The term objectivity is important in measurement because   of the scientific demand that observations  be  subject  to  public verification. A measurement  system  is  objective  to  the extent that two observers (A) evaluate / evaluating the  same performance arrive at the same (or very similar) measurements. For example, using a tape measure  to  determine the distance a javelin (B) threw / was thrown yields very similar results regardless of who reads the tape. By comparison, evaluation of performances such as diving, gymnastics, and figure skating is more subjective ─ although elaborate scoring rules help make (C) it / them more objective. From the point of view of research in motor behavior, it is important to use performances in the  laboratory  for  which  the scoring can be as objective as possible.
* javelin: 투창

(A) (B)	(C)
① evaluate      …… threw	…… it
② evaluate      …… threw	…… them
③ evaluating  …… threw	…… it
④ evaluating …… was thrown …… them
⑤ evaluating …… was thrown …… it




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　A special feature of the real estate rental market is its tendency to undergo a severe and prolonged  contraction  phase, more so than with manufactured products. When the supply of a manufactured product  ① exceeds  the  demand, the manufacturer cuts back on output, and the merchant reduces  inventory  to  balance  supply  and  demand.  However,  ② property  owners  cannot  reduce   the amount of space available for  rent  in  their  buildings.  Space  that  was constructed to accommodate business and  consumer  needs at the  peak  of  the  cycle  ③ remains,  so  vacancy  rates climb and the downward trend becomes more severe. Rental rates generally do  not  drop  below  a  certain  point,  the ④ maximum that must be charged in order to cover operating expenses. Some owners will take space off the market rather than lose money on it. A few, unable to  subsidize the property, will  sell  at  distress  prices,  and lenders will  repossess  others.  These  may  then  be  placed  on the market at lower  rental  rates,  further  ⑤ depressing  the market.
* contraction  phase: 경기 수축기(후퇴기)
** distress price: 투매 가격(판매자가 손해를 감수하는 매우 싼 가격)








30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Born in Budapest to a family of  bankers,  von  Neumann was undeniably bright. At age eight, ① he had mastered calculus. At age twelve, he was reading works aimed at professional mathematicians.  But  ② he  also  loved  to  invent mechanical toys and became a child expert on  Byzantine history. When it  was  time  to  go  off  to  university, he agreed to study chemical engineering as a compromise with his father, who feared that ③ his son couldn’t make a living as a mathematician.  Von  Neumann kept  his  bargain  by  enrolling  at  the  University   of Budapest and promptly leaving for  Berlin,  where  he  spent his time doing mathematics, and  returning  to  Budapest  at  the end of every semester to  take  examinations.  He  published ④ his second mathematics paper, in  which  he  gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, at  age nineteen. By age  twenty-five  ⑤ he  had  published  ten  major papers; by age thirty, nearly three dozen.
* calculus: 미적분학

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. Not all interesting discoveries have  an  obvious  application.  If  you  believe  you  have  something,  but   you’re not sure what exactly  it’s  going  to  be  good  for,  don’t give up. Many innovations  languished  in  labs  for  years  until  they  were 	. Teflon, an extremely slippery synthetic substance  employed  as  a  coating on cooking utensils, was invented in 1938, but  it  didn’t coat its  first  pan  till  1954.  The  Post-it  note  was  built  on  the  back  of  some  not-very-good   glue.   Its inventor  believed  it  might  have  value,  but  it  took  him  five years to  find  a  potentially  profitable  use  for  it.  HP  had   a   breakthrough   with   a   super-accurate   thermometer
that was created  in  the  HP  Labs.  Despite  its  accuracy,  there was no clear use for the device until it was used to measure fluctuations in ocean temperature. [3점]
* languish: 시들해지다
① replaced by new ones
② matched to a product
③ backed up by a theory
④ found  to  be eco-friendly
⑤ tested  for  their accuracy








32. Empathy is a character trait that  we  value  in  ourselves  and in our friends, colleagues, and the professionals  who  serve us. The know-how to be empathetic is central to  practical wisdom: unless we can  understand  how  others  think and feel, it’s difficult to know  the  right  thing  to  do. But empathy has its dark side: too much understanding and sensitivity, too much seeing things from the other’s perspective,  can 	. Edmund Pellegrino, a scholar of bioethics, explains it  like  this: “If a physician  identifies  too  closely  as  co-sufferer  with the patient, she loses the objectivity  essential  to  the  most precise assessment of what is wrong, of what can be
done, and of what should be done to meet those needs. Excessive  co-suffering  also  impedes  and  may  even  paralyze the physician into a state of inaction.”
* impede: 방해하다
① block everlasting friendship
② justify doctors’ abuse of power
③ cloud judgment and paralyze choice
④ lead to a hasty but correct diagnosis
⑤ decrease doctors’ compassion for patients



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Bees  have  their  choice  of  flora  according  to   color. Lord Avenbury once made  an  experiment  to  see  if  the  color of flowers attracted bees. Placing honey on slips  of  paper of different shades, he found that the insects which visited  them  seemed  to  have  a  marked  preference  for  blue, after which came  white,  yellow,  red,  green  and  orange. This finding should be  considered  for  our  beekeeping planning. If pollination  is  the  prime  consideration of taming bees and if the crop is identified,
 	  while planning. Let us consider beekeeping near a mustard field. Mustard  gives tiny yellow flowers full of  nectar  and  pollen.  For  better  yield  of  mustard  seeds,  pollination  is   necessary.  But if there is  plenty  of  blue-colored  wild  flora  nearby,  bees  may  prefer  the  blue  flowers  to  mustard.   Although  we shall get honey and other products, the objective for pollination of mustard may be defeated. [3점]
* flora: 식물군
① bees’ preference for color should be put aside
② a greater harvest can be expected near blue flora
③ the quality of honey should be taken into account
④ the abundance of blue flora nearby must be ensured
⑤ the color of other floras nearby should be considered



34. In the mid-1900s, John Kenneth Galbraith shocked  the  field  of  economics  when  he  insisted  that  consumers  do  not  merely  participate  in  the  marketplace,  they  are  also  the product of the systematic deployment  of  power throughout society. Within this deployment of power, commercial  media  ensures  that  consumers  adopt   values and beliefs that match the general requirements of the economy. The individual’s participation in mass behavior patterns  is 	. Consumers engage in shared patterns  of  consumption  because  they  live  within  an  economic  system   that  operates as a belief system. It exercises considerable
control over the meaning and value of things. When the economy  functions  as  a  belief  system,  it  establishes   severe limits on a consumer’s  free  choice.  As  consumers,  our choices are not entirely our own. Our beliefs, values, thoughts,  and  emotions  are  highly  conditioned  to   match the needs of the marketplace. [3점]
* deployment: 배치
① not driven by commercial media’s agenda
② a product of unconditioned personal choice
③ not a spontaneous reaction to random forces
④ not affected by the needs of the marketplace
⑤ an outcome irrelevant to the economic system
35. 
주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

(A) In crying out, the danger-spotting  squirrel  draws  attention  to  itself,  which  may  well  attract  the  predator. Scientists used to think  that  animals  would  risk their lives like this only for kin with whom they shared common genes.
(B) This  wisdom  holds  outside  the  human  family  circle   as well.  For  example,  when  one  ground  squirrel  sees  a predator in the distance, it will  sound  an  alarm  call that  alerts  other  squirrels  to  run  for  cover.  It’s   a risky move.
(C) New evidence suggests, however, that squirrels also sound alarm calls for former playmates, not genetically related. These squirrels developed a social resource while playing ― and these buddies will put their lives on the line to save their playmates.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[36～37] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
36. 

　Self-fulfilling prophecies can have a positive  side.  ( ① ) We know that students introduced to their teachers as “intellectual  bloomers”  often  do  better  on  achievement  tests than do their counterparts who lack such a positive introduction. (  ② )  In  a  study  of  army  tank  crews,  one  set of tank commanders was told  that  some  members  of  their assigned crews had exceptional abilities while others  were only average.  (  ③ )  In  reality,  the  crew  members  had been assigned randomly so  that  the  two  test  groups  were equal in  ability.  (  ④ )  The  commanders  later  reported that the so-called “exceptional” crew members performed better than the “average” ones. ( ⑤ ) The self-fulfilling effects in these cases strongly suggest that managers adopt positive and optimistic approaches toward others at work.
* bloomer: 재능을 발휘하는 사람


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 



But neither are aware of this fact when it comes to unmarked crosswalks.

Studies do show that motorists are more likely to yield

39. One of the many strengths of the African American community is an intrinsic support for the athletic endeavors    of African American girls and women. ① Since African American culture appreciates a greater flexibility of gender roles and accepts a broader range of gender-appropriate

to pedestrians in marked crosswalks than at unmarked crosswalks. But as some researchers found, that does not necessarily make things safer. ( ① )  When  they  compared the  way  pedestrians  crossed  at  both  kinds  of  crosswalks  on roads with considerable traffic volumes, they found that people at unmarked crosswalks tended to look both  ways  more often, waited more often for gaps  in  traffic,  and  crossed the road more quickly. (  ② )  Researchers  suspect that both drivers and  pedestrians  are  more  aware  that  drivers  should  yield  to  pedestrians  in  marked  crosswalks.   ( ③ ) Not knowing traffic safety laws, it  turns  out,  is  actually a good thing for  pedestrians.  (  ④ )  Because  they do not know whether cars are supposed to  stop,  they  act  more cautiously. (  ⑤ )  Marked  crosswalks,  by  contrast, may give pedestrians an unrealistic picture of their  own  safety. [3점]









[38～39]  다음  글에서   전체  흐름과   관계  없는   문장을 고르시오.
38. Some researchers investigated the  effects  of  different  media on children’s ability  to  produce  imaginative  responses. In one study, children in grades one through four were separated  randomly  into  two  groups  and  presented  with  the same fictional  story.  One  group  listened  to  the  story  via radio, while the other group watched the story on a television. ① Afterward, all of  the  children  were  asked what they thought would happen next in the story. ② The researchers  rated  children’s  imaginativeness  by  recording the novel elements (such  as  characters,  setting,  dialogue,  and feelings) they used  in  their  responses.  ③ Some novelists prefer to  include  as  many  characters  as  possible  in their stories. ④ The children who listened to the radio produced more imaginative responses, whereas the children who watched the television produced more words  that  repeated the original story.  ⑤ Media  scholars  have  used  this study to illustrate the “visualization hypothesis,” which states that children’s exposure to ready-made visual images restricts  their  ability  to  generate  novel  images  of  their own.

behaviors, African American women are not as bound  as  white women by gender role stereotypes. ② Athletics  for  girls and women is not perceived as conflicting with an African American female’s gender role.  ③ Hall  and  Bower’s study of African American females found that African American women defined  themselves  as  “softly  strong” ― owning  both strength and femininity without conflict. ④ African American males have played  an  increasingly  important  role in global politics. ⑤ Welcome support from the African American community has energized many African American girls and women to participate in sports.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





(A) (B)
① challenging …… distorts
② demanding           …… activates
③ comprehensible   …… increases
④ difficult	…… hinders
⑤ accessible	…… stimulates



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 



(C) 
　As  he came around a sloping curve on his bicycle, Jim     hit  a  car  parked  on  the  side  of  the  road.  (c) He  ended  up in the  hospital.  Besides  bad  cuts  on  his  head,  he  broke his right arm and was in  a  cast  for  two  months.  Jim’s doctor gave him a series of tests.  The  doctor  concluded  that  (d) he  had  suffered  nerve  damage   and  that he might never regain the full use of his right arm.















41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Innate  Advantages  of  the Strong
② How Are the Superior Determined?
③ Population Growth in Marine Life
④ Why Do Species Avoid Competing?
⑤ Every Aspect of a Species’ Lifestyle

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① shifting balance	② fixed hierarchy
③ strong  dependency	④ lasting collaboration
⑤ one-way relationship

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Jim Nelson, a junior at Manti High School, was an outstanding athlete. He  had  just  made  the  school  basketball team, one of the best in  the  state.  But  on  October 23, 1996, most of (a) his athletic  future  was suddenly taken away  from  him.  Jim  was  riding  his  bicycle at night to visit  his  friend.  The  road  was  very  steep in some places. It was very dark and difficult to see.

(D)
　Jim never became a starter,  but  he  was  always  the  first substitute to go in the game. Jim  got  a  chance to play in the last 30 seconds of the championship  game when a starting player sprained (e) his ankle. With 10 seconds left, Jim balanced the ball in his left hand and   took the shot. The crowd was  deathly  quiet  until ―  swish! He made the three-point-shot  left-handed!  Jim  won not only the game but also the hearts of  his  teammates for proving that with determination,  no  obstacle is too great.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 Jim에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Manti  고등학교의 뛰어난 운동선수였다.
② 부상당한 해의 남은 경기에는 선수로 참여하지 못했다.
③ 자전거를 타고 가다가 주차된 차에 부딪쳤다.
④ 챔피언 결정전에 처음부터 출전했다.
⑤ 왼손으로 3점 슛을 성공시켰다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2014학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① You’re right. He’s a great singer.
② That’s a very good idea. Let’s go.
③ Sorry. All the tickets are sold out.
④ Hurry up. We’re late for the show.
⑤ No. Our seats are close to the stage.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, she is. I’m really proud of my mother.
② Not yet. The ceremony will begin at 10 a.m.
③ Yes. She wants to major in history in college.
④ Why don’t you buy a flower basket for your mother?
⑤ That’s incredible! Why does she want to go to college?



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 학교 급식 메뉴 선정 기준을 설명하려고
② 학교 홈페이지 제작 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 학교 급식 만족도 설문 조사 결과를 발표하려고
④ 학교 급식 메뉴 건의 방식 변경을 안내하려고
⑤ 방학 중 학생 식당 보수 공사 계획을 공지하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 감상이 집중력 향상에 미치는 영향
② 공원 내 자전거 전용 도로 설치의 필요성
③ 보행자 안전을 위한 교통 체계 개선 방안
④ 헤드폰으로 음악을 들으며 걷는 것의 위험성
⑤ 공공장소에서 음악을 들을 때 지켜야 할 예절



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 래프팅 수강생 ? 강사	② 관광객 ? 여행 가이드
③ 호텔 투숙객 ? 접수원	④ 고객 ? 옷가게 주인
⑤ 비행기 승객 ? 비행기 승무원



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사다리 빌려 주기
② 주방의 전구 갈아 주기
③ 거실에 칠할 페인트 골라 주기
④ 재고 정리 세일 기간 알아봐 주기
⑤ 상점에서 집까지 차로 데려다 주기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 목요일에 스터디 그룹 모임에 참석할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 시험 준비를 해야 해서
② 방과후학교 시간과 겹쳐서
③ 할아버지 병문안을 가야 해서
④ 다른 친구들과 약속이 있어서
⑤ 병원에 진료를 받으러 가야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 자선 단체에 전달할 총 성금액을 고르시오.
[3점]
① $60	② $70	③ $80	④ $90	⑤ $100

10.대화를  듣고,  여자가  사고  싶어  하는  드레스에  관해  두  사람  이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 판매처	② 옷감	③ 색상	④ 길이	⑤ 가격

1.Waterfront Town Movie Night에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일 치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월 6일에 개최된다.
② 영화감독이 관객을 만나는 시간이 있다.
③ 오후 6시부터 팝콘과 음료가 제공된다.
④ 모든 연령의 사람들이 관람할 수 있다.
⑤ 수익금은 주민 체육 시설을 보수하는 데 사용된다.




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  선택할  서비스를
고르시오.

Home Cleaning Services



①
②
③
④
⑤

13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① Well, it’s hard to join the writing club.
② Okay. You can borrow the camera anytime.
③ Me, too. I’d like to take pictures of the students.
④ Yeah. I heard it took a whole year to complete it.
⑤ Yes. Students are encouraged to grow their own plants.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Right. I envy your daughter for having a father like you.
② No. I didn’t expect the movie would be so good.
③ I’m worried about her, but she doesn’t listen to me.
④ My pleasure. I’ll take her to the concert for you.
⑤ It’s okay. You can go to the concert next time.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Rachel이  사서에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Rachel:  	
① I won’t forget to return the book in time.
② That’s because I couldn’t borrow the book.
③ I’m planning to be a librarian in the future.
④ I lost the borrowed book, so I bought a new one.
⑤ I’d like to borrow one of the books in the reading list.

[16 ∼ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 재활용 제품을 판매하는 회사를 홍보하려고
② 재활용 제품의 제작 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 재활용 센터 운영의 개선 방안을 제안하려고
④ 폐품을 이용한 예술 작품 전시회를 안내하려고
⑤ 폐품 재활용이 환경에 미치는 영향을 설명하려고

17.언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① baskets	② backpacks	③ curtains
④ drinking glasses ⑤ clocks

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 새로 개원한 병원을 홍보하려고
② 구강 검진 결과에 대해 알려 주려고
③ 약 복용 시 주의 사항을 설명하려고
④ 병원 예약 날짜와 시간을 통보하려고
⑤ 치과 정기 검진을 받을 것을 권유하려고



19.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　People in reasonably good health at the age of 60 can now expect to live close to thirty more years. These can be the happiest years of their lives, since the pressures of earning a living, building a career, and raising a family are behind them. Workers can use their “golden years” to do many of the things they had always hoped to do, but never had the opportunity to do because of their 40­plus­hour workweeks. Unfortunately, the cost of these additional retirement years can present a problem if there is insufficient financial preparation. Therefore, a retirement plan needs to be set in motion at an early stage of life to assure that retirement is all that it can be.
① 삶의 질 향상을 위해 주당 근무 시간을 줄여야 한다.
② 은퇴 후에는 안정성에 바탕을 두고 자산을 관리해야 한다.
③ 노년의 건강한 삶을 위해 적절한 취미 활동을 찾아야 한다.
④ 은퇴 후의 삶을 위해 일찍부터 재정적인 준비를 해야 한다.
⑤ 고령화 사회에 진입함에 따라 근로자의 정년을 연장해야 한다.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The two­year­old child dances for her father when he comes home, before he takes her in his arms. The smallest child who is capable of any action is capable of making it worth watching, of capturing adult attention for a time. As we grow up we learn that we cannot expect the attention of others as often as we would like to have it; still we are watchers of ourselves and of each other, and if we believe in God or gods we believe we are being watched from above. Even if we don’t, we can’t always escape the thought that our parents are watching us. In deciding what to do or how to do it, we often ask ourselves what these watchers would think of us. And then we pretend. We tell ourselves stories about what we are doing as individuals, framing our actions all the while as deserving an audience. To imagine yourself totally without an audience would be painful and difficult.
① 우리는 가정 교육을 통해 적절한 사회 규범을 배운다.
② 우리는 누군가가 우리를 지켜봐 주기를 바라며 행동한다.
③ 부모는 자기 자녀의 실수에 더 엄격한 기준을 적용한다.
④ 주변 사람의 관심은 어린이의 창의력 발달을 촉진시킨다.
⑤ 부모와의 신체적 접촉은 자녀의 정서적 안정에 도움을 준다.

2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There are a variety of currents in the oceans, and because they move and mix the water they will influence various aspects of the environment. One especially important environmental impact of currents is that they can move nutrients from deep water to the surface, where these nutrients can be used by plants, in the photosynthetic process, to produce organic matter. Currents can also disperse waste products, eggs, larvae, and adult life­forms. Some fish lay their eggs in or near a current, which may then carry the eggs and young into an environment favorable for growth. By mixing ocean water, currents keep water­temperature changes to a minimum. Turbulence caused by currents adds oxygen to the water ― oxygen that fish need.	* turbulence: (물결의) 휘몰아침
① effects of currents on the environment of marine life
② changes in ocean currents caused by global warming
③ various ways of using currents in scientific research
④ the relationship between fish species and fishing
⑤ types of ocean currents and their characteristics


23. Hillsdale Library Reading Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?















21.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　In one study, fourteen­month­olds watched an adult experimenter bend over and activate a light by pressing the button with her head. For some of the infants, the adult’s hands were bound by a blanket. The babies were then given the light switch to play with. Infants who saw the adult whose arms were bound activated the light switch with their hand because they understood that the adult was unable to use their hands. However, if they were the ones who saw that the adult’s hands were free, then the infants bent over and activated the button with their head, too. They must have reasoned that it was important to use the head and not the hands. Infants were not simply copying the actions but rather repeating the intended goal.
① What the Body Language Means to Adults



















① 11월 1일부터 30일 동안 책을 읽는다.



















* raffle: 복권 추첨

② Infants’ Unconditional Imitation of Adults
③ Infants Get Satisfaction from Bodily Movements
④ Infants’ Ability to Understand Why Beyond How
⑤ What Matters in Mind Reading: Not Why but Who

② 읽을 책을 최소한 다섯 권 이상 선정해야 한다.
③ 독후감 한 편당 복권 추첨에 응모할 표를 한 장씩 받는다.
④ 독서 시상 파티는 11월 27일에 네 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 월요일부터 금요일까지 도서관을 방문해서 등록할 수 있다.




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

24. Weber University Junior Scholars Program에 관한 다음 안
내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 11학년과 12학년 학생들이 3주 동안 참여한다.
② 대학 학점을 취득할 수 있다.
③ 대학 입학과 대인 관계에 관한 세미나에 참석해야 한다.
④ 다양한 스포츠 활동에 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 과정 첫째 주에 Queens Island로 현장 학습을 간다.




25.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In most wilderness, the majority of groups ① visiting the area are small ― usually between two and four people. But large groups do visit wilderness, and their potential to disturb campsites differs from ② that of small groups. Although the effect of party size on campsites has never been formally studied, it makes sense that a large group can cause impacts on an undisturbed site more ③ rapidly than a small group. For example, along the New River in West Virginia, the area of vegetation loss on sites used by large commercial rafting companies ④ were more than four times larger than the area on sites used by small groups of fishermen. At well­established campsites, however, a big group need not be a problem, as long as activities are ⑤ confined within the boundaries of the existing site.

26.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
How America Spends Money:
100 Years in the Life of the Family Budget


　The graph above shows the changes in the percentage of spending on five components in the American family budget for about a century from 1900 to 2003. ① During the whole period, the proportion of spending on food dropped most sharply and it took up less than 15 percent in 2003. ② On the other hand, the percentage of spending on housing increased steadily, and in 2003 it eventually surpassed the percentage of spending on food. ③ In the case of apparel, the percentage steadily decreased during the period, and it was the second smallest among the five components in 2003. ④ For half a century from 1900 to 1950, the proportion of spending on health care remained the same, and then it rose to about 6 percent in 2003. ⑤ From 1950 to 2003, the percentages of spending on two components decreased, but the percentages of spending on three components increased.




27.coral bean에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Whether in flower or in fruit, coral bean is one of the most striking plants in the American Southwest. Much of the year, however, the leafless brown stems are scarcely noticeable in their rocky hillside habitat. In June, clusters of red flowers sprout from the stem tips, attracting hummingbirds. Leaves appear once the summer rains start, usually in July. Coral bean plants are most noticeable in the autumn when their leaves have turned golden and the brown pods reveal the (occasionally light brown) seeds. Alkaloids make coral bean seeds highly toxic. In the Southwest, winter temperatures prevent coral bean from growing much taller than three feet, but in the frost­free parts of northern Mexico, it is a small tree up to twenty feet tall.
① 6월에 줄기 끝에서 빨간 꽃이 핀다.
② 여름 우기가 시작되면 잎이 나온다.
③ 가을에 잎이 황금색으로 변하고 씨앗이 드러난다.
④ 씨앗은 독성이 매우 강하다.
⑤ 미국 남서부 지역에서는 겨울에도 20피트 이상 자란다.




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

28.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은?
　In “The Frog Prince” story, a princess loses her favorite ball in a pond. However, a frog appears and promises to retrieve her ball if she lets him eat at her table, drink from her cup, and sleep in her bed. (A) Desperate / Unwilling to have her ball back, the princess agrees, but when the frog appears at her door the next day she is disgusted by the prospect of being truthful and fulfilling her promise. But her father, the king, gives her no choice and she is (B) compelled / forbidden to carry out her promise. When the promise has been fulfilled the frog disappears, its place being taken by a handsome prince with whom she falls in love. Grateful that she has been truthful and kept her promise, even if it was at her father’s
(C) indifference / insistence , the prince marries the princess and they live happily ever after.


①
(A)
Desperate

······
(B)
compelled

······
(C)
indifference
②
Desperate
······
compelled
······
insistence
③
Desperate
······
forbidden
······
indifference
④
Unwilling
······
compelled
······
indifference
⑤
Unwilling
······
forbidden
······
insistence














29.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Benny Tee was one of my very good friends. He ran a retail shoe store near my house. Two weeks before Christmas a poor man walked into Benny’s store. Looking around at all the shoes, he asked, “Are you Mr. Tee?” and Benny said, “Yes.” “I want a special pair of shoes for ① my son.” Standing next to him was an eleven­year­old boy dressed in shabby clothes. Benny looked down at the boy’s feet and saw that ② he had club feet. His father explained, “The one thing my son wants for Christmas is a pair of shoes like the other kids. Could you make them for ③ him?” Benny said, “Yes, but it will take time to order a special kind of leather to make shoes for ④ him. I can’t promise they’ll be done by Christmas.” The leather didn’t come until the 24th. It took Benny until 4:00 in the morning of Christmas Day to complete his work. But when ⑤ he kindly delivered the special pair of shoes to the boy’s home, Benny Tee received the best Christmas gift of his life. He received Joy.
* club foot: 선천적으로 안쪽으로 굽은 발

[30 ~ 32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. Fundamental to most moral approaches is the idea that human life has a special dignity and value that is worth
preserving even at the expense of self­interest. From this belief it follows, as Charles Beitz notes in his classic work Political                  Theory                     and          International                           Relations,                            “that     there     are occasions when we have reasons to disregard the demands of self­interest by taking a moral point of view towards human affairs.” This requires, says Beitz, that we regard the world and our actions in it from the standpoint of one person among many rather than as a particular person with particular interests. This position requires us to choose courses of action, policies, rules, and institutions on grounds that would be acceptable to any agent who was  	 among competing interests involved. [3점]
① impartial	② ambitious	③ renowned
④ selfish	⑤ imaginative



















31. People who use visualization as a support for cancer treatment and other life­threatening illnesses have discovered the importance of 	. For example, after
Carl’s cancer diagnosis he began visualizing the cancer cells being killed by soldiers. It was only after work with his therapist that he realized this could not be effective for him as he had been a committed pacifist for a long time. His subconscious would not easily welcome a warlike image. He settled on using an image of the cancer cells being rescued from their path of destruction by angels and taken to a place of reeducation where they could become “good” cells. It worked for him, and he is convinced that his belief in the principle and his consistency in practicing it positively supported his medical treatment and cure. [3점]
* pacifist: 평화주의자
① focusing on symptoms
② frequency of treatment
③ careful image selection
④ support from family members
⑤ using high­tech medical equipment




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

32. Subjective	well­being	is	at	least	partly	temporary	in
response to the consumption of new and novel consumer goods. Pleasure has a stable component dependent on the accustomed consumption flows, but it also has a component that is dependent on change. Once the change occurs and the new consumer item becomes a part of the daily consumption bundle, the pleasure of novelty disappears and overall satisfaction returns to the original amount. A new kind of cereal at breakfast will temporarily add to our pleasure, but eventually our enjoyment of breakfast will return to its normal level. Also, as our incomes and material standards rise, so do our expected achievements. The purchase of a second automobile made possible by rising income increases our subjective well­being, but at the same time our aspirations rise and a second car becomes a part of our consumption expectations.  	 returns our subjective well­being to its normal amount. [3점]
① The realization that our income is losing its buying power
② Feeling	increasing	gap	between	our	income	and aspirations
③ Development in technology resulting from repeated use of new products
④ The ever­decreasing income due to the global economic crisis
⑤ The shrinkage in the gap between our expectations and realizations






3.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The dog’s natural tendency to memorize landmarks can actually hinder training. Younger dogs are so good at learning locations that they often spontaneously memorize their surroundings as part of the set of cues that tells them to do something. (A) , puppies  taught  the  verbal command “sit” in a training class may appear to have forgotten it as soon as they get home ― because, in addition to the command, they have spontaneously memorized as the relevant cue some feature of the room where the class was held and, in different surroundings, do not recognize the command. (B) , many dog trainers repeat a training exercise in a variety of places, in order to break such associations and isolate the intended cue, in this case, the verbal command alone.
(A) (B)
① For example	······	Therefore
② For example	······	Similarly
③ In contrast	······	Therefore
④ In contrast	······	Otherwise
⑤ In addition	······	Similarly

34.다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sitting motionless, leaning back against the trunk of a tall and shady pine tree, breathing in the fresh air, I was the sole visitor to my childhood beach. The early morning had already begun to warm up, as was normal for summer mornings in Bimini. The coarse white sand stuck to the back of my legs and thighs but provided a cool feeling. The gentle lapping sounds of the quiet ocean were fascinating as the tide lazily trickled onto the beach. Not a creature was stirring. No vehicles passed along the narrow hill street, which seemed to always have a constant stream of scooters and trucks racing by. No boats cruised the still sea. Even the seagulls were still resting! The beach at dawn provided the perfect place for meditation.
① calm and peaceful	② noisy and festive
③ tense and frightening ④ funny and humorous
⑤ gloomy and monotonous


[35 ~ 36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
35. As striking as the Greeks’ freedom and individuality is their sense of curiosity about the world. Aristotle thought
that curiosity was the uniquely defining property of human beings. ① St. Luke said of the Athenians of a later era: “They spend their time in nothing else but to tell or to hear some new thing.” ② The Greeks, far more than their contemporaries, speculated about the nature of the world they found themselves in and created models of it. ③ Slaves played an important role in Greek society and their status was dependent on how much labor they contributed to the society. ④ They constructed these models by categorizing objects and events and generating rules about them that were sufficiently precise for systematic description and explanation. ⑤ This characterized their advances in the fields of physics, astronomy, geometry, rational philosophy, and natural history.


36. The tongue map was based on German research published in 1901, but Edwin Boring, an influential Harvard psychologist, mistranslated it. ① What the original research had shown was that the human tongue has areas of relative
sensitivity to different tastes, but his translation stated that each could only be tasted in one zone. ② What is really mysterious about the tongue map is that it was the official truth for such a long time, even though it’s so easily disproved. ③ The sense of taste is related to the sense of smell and that is why we can’t detect tastes well when we have a runny nose. ④ It wasn’t until 1974 that another American scientist, Dr. Virginia Collings, reexamined the original theory. ⑤ She showed that, though sensitivity to the four main tastes did vary around the tongue, it was only to an insignificant degree.




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[37 ~ 38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
37. 

39.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한
곳은?








(A) I, on the other hand, concluded the poodle was the smartest of all the dogs tested. When confronted with this obstacle, he analyzed the situation and chose the easiest way of achieving the goal of getting to the other side of the wall ― he simply walked around it!
(B) The test involved having various breeds of dog negotiate a high wall in order to get to the other side. Dog after dog jumped over the wall. Finally, it was the standard poodle’s turn. The poodle stood there for a moment, as if to size up the obstacle in front of him.
(C) Then he casually walked around the wall and joined his fellow competitors on the other side of it. These so­called experts concluded that the poodle had failed the test ― he hadn’t possessed the intelligence to jump over it.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



38. 
　
Psychologists make the distinction between dispositions, or traits, and states, or momentary feelings. ( ① ) Think of some moments of happiness or despair you have experienced, such as when you won a prize or got an exciting job offer, or when somebody died. ( ② ) These experiences are states of happiness or sadness; they reflect the transient highs and lows of everyday life. ( ③ ) These are the emotional styles or ways of thinking that remain fairly steadfast across our lives. ( ④ ) Mary has “Mary­like” characteristics that remain fairly stable, just as Dave stays “Dave­like” under all circumstances. ( ⑤ ) Cheerful, happy babies tend to become adventurous, outgoing children who tend to become extroverted, sociable adults.
* transient: 일시적인




40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





(A) It often shows up as a spice in Asian cuisine. Aside from its unique flavor, turmeric may also prove a helpful treatment for people with arthritis, Alzheimer’s disease, and some forms of cancer.
(B) This healing art borrows many of its ideas from Hinduism, incorporating multiple therapies that include herbs, massage, and meditation. Ayurvedic practitioners may even go so far as to try a new food to heal. One medicinal food from Ayurveda may be familiar to you: turmeric.
(C) Although the research evidence isn’t yet conclusive, it certainly is highly recommended for these conditions. My own experience of using turmeric as an anti­inflammatory has been extraordinarily positive.
* anti­inflammatory: 소염제
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)











?


(A) (B)
① enhanced by	······	philosophy
② compared to	······	language
③ cherished by	······	language
④ compared to	······	technology
⑤ enhanced by	······	technology




8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)

(D)






41.위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Put Yourself in Another’s Shoes to Solve Conflict
② Compliment Your Employees Rather Than Criticize
③ How to Identify Your Company’s Top Performers
④ Building Teamwork Through Physical Activities
⑤ A Happy Family Life: A Shortcut to Success

42.위 글의 빈칸에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
① creativity	② cooperation	③ accuracy
④ diversity	⑤ endurance


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Tom was a strong­willed, competitive, hardworking businessman, who for thirty years ran a neighborhood hardware store. At the age of 58, poor health forced him to sell his business. His routine became one of turning on the television, pouring a bowl of chips, and spending the day in his favorite chair. His friend Don came by to see how (a) he was doing. He found his friend gaining weight, with a dark complexion and a very bad attitude.






43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D) ③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
4.밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45.위 글의 Tom에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 건강이 좋지 않아 58세에 가게를 팔았다.
② Robert라는 소년과 ‘hangman’ 게임을 했다.
③ 친구와 함께 병원 광대로 활동했다.
④ 병원 영양사로부터 더 좋은 식습관을 배웠다.
⑤ 병원을 방문하자는 친구의 요청에 마지못해 응했다.



2015학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. I bought it for your birthday.
② I’ll go to the shop and get a refund.
③ You’re right. I’ll get some ornaments.
④ I’m sorry. I don’t feel like fishing now.
⑤ That’s true. I need to clean the fish tank.


2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Oops! I forgot to return the book.
② I wish you could remember where it was.
③ That sounds great. Everything’s going well so far.
④ Probably. It’s inconsiderate to damage public property.
⑤ You should have met the deadline for the assignment.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 할인 행사를 홍보하려고
② 쇼핑몰 상호 변경을 안내하려고
③ 공사로 인한 불편에 대해 사과하려고
④ 고객편의시설 이용을 권장하려고
⑤ 쇼핑몰 이전 계획을 공지하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 스마트폰의 다양한 기능
② 정기적인 건강검진의 중요성
③ 스마트폰 중독이 야기하는 사회문제
④ 학습에 도움이 되는 신문 활용법
⑤ 스마트폰 사용 시 바른 자세


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 헬스 트레이너 ? 고객	② 영양사 ? 조리사
③  의상 디자이너 ? 모델	④ 운전 강사 ? 수강생
⑤ 스포츠 용품점 직원 ? 운동선수


6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to wrap up a soccer ball	② to sponsor a child
③ to buy a birthday present	④ to help write a letter
⑤ to play with his brother

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 보고서 주제를 변경하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 온라인 자료의 신뢰성이 떨어져서
② 설문 조사 분석 시간이  오래 걸려서
③ 다른 학생의 연구주제와  중복되어서
④ 기한 내에 보고서를 제출할 수 없어서
⑤ 인터뷰 대상자를 충분히 구할 수 없어서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 27	② $ 29	③ $ 37	④ $ 39	⑤ $ 42

10. 대화를 듣고, 2015 International Music Festival에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개막일	② 장소	③ 참가국 수
④ 공연 횟수	⑤ 입장료

11. Friendly Wheels에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 14년 전에 만들어진 동아리이다.
② 신입생만 가입할 수 있다.
③ 회원의 집 주소에 따라 3개 그룹으로 나뉜다.
④ 매달 모여 여행 경로에 대해 논의한다.
⑤ 교통비를 절약하여 환경단체에 기부한다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 공기청정기를 고르시오.
Air Purifier

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① You’re right. You need to find a new guitar teacher.
② Exactly! You should put your studies before your hobbies.
③ Of course, you should learn fancy skills as soon as possible.
④ Right, changing guitars will certainly improve your technique.
⑤ Yes. Keep practicing the essentials and you’ll be great someday.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Sounds great. I’m going to let him know about it.
② For sure. He’s looking forward to his retirement.
③ Community centers should provide cultural programs.
④ Thanks for the offer. I desperately needed a job.
⑤ So, how did he overcome his depression?
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Sally가 Jonathan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sally:  	
① Don’t worry. I’ve already made the posters.
② Would you please pick me up on your way?
③ Leave it to me and I’ll get the posters for you.
④ Don’t forget to collect the posters on time.
⑤ Please stop being picky. Give me a break.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① typical symptoms of jet lag
② criteria for setting time zones
③ effective ways to avoid jet lag
④ the sun’s effects on melatonin production
⑤ how to ensure physical comfort during flights
17. 멜라토닌 생성을 높이는 식품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① pineapples	② oranges	③ potatoes
④ oats	⑤ barley


18. 
다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Piglet was suffering from the very essence of worry. His mind was filled with all manner of possible horrors and disasters. “Supposing that...,” “What if...,” and their variants are the hallmark of worry and anxiety. “Supposing a tree fell down, Pooh, when we were underneath it?” Of course it is possible. All kinds of dreadful things could happen today or tomorrow. But most of them are very unlikely. Once you allow yourself to worry about the unlikely, there is no end to worrying. Imagine looking back on a life of worry about the unlikely. It would be a life spoiled by anxiety about things, the vast majority of which never happened. Whenever you catch yourself worrying that something dreadful might happen, answer the Piglet in yourself with Pooh’s reply: “Supposing it didn’t.” Tackling existing problems is quite enough; do not waste energy and happiness on problems which do not exist.

① 일어날 것 같지 않은 일에 대해 걱정하지 마라.
② 불안을 해소하기 위해 근본적인 원인을 찾아라.
③ 과거에 얽매이지 말고 현재에 충실해야 한다.
④ 적당한 긴장감을 유지하여 일의 효율성을 높여라.
⑤ 문제 해결을 위해 여러 사람의 의견을 경청해야 한다.




19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Both of us quiet, I put Lucy’s Mickey Mouse pajamas on her. Silent and somewhat still, she stood on the changing table as I held her close to zip her up. I breathed in the clean smell of her hair, feeling blonde curls tickle my chin. Suddenly, Lucy reached her arms around my neck, holding the back of my head tight between her arms. Little hands, little everything, pulled me to her, and she pressed her cheek to mine. It took only a moment to realize what was happening. “She’s hugging me for the very first time.” I wanted to yell for my husband, a neighbor, anyone to come see what my daughter was doing for the first time. We held each other for a few seconds, my daughter standing on the changing table dressed in her fuzzy red sleeper, her arms around my neck, her cheek pressed to my left shoulder. “Oh, Lucy,” I whispered, my words tight with tears. I never wanted to let go.

① lost and confused	② moved and delighted
③ relaxed and relieved	④ jealous and envious
⑤ nervous and frightened




영어 영역	3

[20~21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Having positive relationships with peers can lead directly to resources and information that help students learn. By virtue of the fact that they are socially accepted, it is reasonable to assume that students who get along with their peers will also have access to peer resources that can promote the development of social and academic competencies. These resources can take the form of information and advice, modeled behavior, or specific experiences that facilitate learning. Teachers play the central pedagogical function of transmitting knowledge and training students in academic subject areas. However, students provide each other with valuable resources necessary to accomplish academic tasks. Students frequently clarify and interpret their teacher’s instructions concerning what they should be doing and how they should do it, provide mutual assistance in the form of volunteering substantive information and answering questions, and share various supplies such as pencils and paper.

① ways to prevent conflict among peers
② benefits of positive peer relationships in learning
③ side effects of strict school discipline on students
④ the importance of teachers’ detailed instructions
⑤ necessary components of effective teaching


21. A business incubator is, quite simply, a building that is divided into units of space, which are then leased to early?stage small businesses. The result is a collection of offices and small warehouses filled with businesses that have one thing in common: they are businesses in the early stages of development. Each of the businesses has problems and needs that are similar, and each is in need of a variety of help, ranging from technical assistance to shared business opportunities to a simple pat on the back. Business incubators are not intended to provide permanent homes to their client businesses but rather to provide them with a temporary nurturing environment, until such time as the business is financially healthy. Upon reaching more predictable profitability, the incubated business can then be expected to “graduate” and move on to a typical office or warehouse building.

① advantages of dividing labor
② the role of business incubators
③ financial advice for incubated businesses
④ how to make profits in a competitive market
⑤ the early?stage obstacles to small businesses

[22~23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. We have seen that individuals in many species are more likely to behave in an altruistic way when close relatives or kin will benefit than when only non?relatives will gain. This suggests that they can recognize which members of their species are kin and which are not. How does this occur? A key point is that individuals are by no means always accurate on this issue. For example, there are several species of birds in which the parents will ignore their own offspring if they are put outside their nest. However, if a cuckoo or other bird deposits an egg inside their nest, they will look after the bird when it hatches as if it were their own. These observations suggest that individuals tend to regard any other animal living in their home as kin even if there is no close physical resemblance. [3점]

① Why Altruism Influences the Social Behavior of Birds
② Nest Defence Is the Top Priority of Parent Birds
③ Recognizing Relatives Is the Key to Survival
④ Hatching Eggs: A Symbol of Aspiration
⑤ Kin Recognition: Is It Always Precise?



23. Maximilian Ringelmann, a French engineer, studied the performance of horses in 1913. He concluded that the power of two animals pulling a coach did not equal twice the power of a single horse. Surprised by this result, he extended his research to humans. He had several men pull a rope and measured the force applied by each individual. On average, if two people were pulling together, each invested just 93 percent of his individual strength, when three pulled together, it was 85 percent, and with eight people, just 49 percent. Science calls this the social loafing effect. It occurs when individual performance is not directly visible; it blends into the group effort. It occurs among rowers, but not in relay races, because here, individual contributions are evident. Social loafing is rational behavior: Why invest all of your energy when half will do ─ especially when this little shortcut goes unnoticed? Quite simply, social loafing is a form of cheating of which we are all guilty even if it takes place unconsciously, just as it does with the horses.

① Why Teams Are Lazy
② How Cooperation Maximizes  Efficiency
③ Where Individual Capability Stands Out
④ Group Competitions Make People More Alert
⑤ Social Loafing: Booster of Individual Performance




4	영어 영역


24. Jeannette Rankin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Jeannette Rankin was born in Missoula, Montana in 1880. After attending public schools in Missoula, Jeannette
majored in biology at the University of Montana and graduated in 1902. Jeannette became the first woman elected to the U.S. Congress in 1916, before women nationwide had the right to vote. In 1917, she became one of 49 members of Congress who voted against entry into World War I. In 1941, she was the only legislator to vote against entry into World War II. The vote effectively ended her political career. In 1943, Jeannette went back to Montana rather than run for Congress again. She traveled worldwide, including to India and Turkey, promoting peace. Her long career was distinguished by her deep commitment to the country’s women, poor, and children. She continued to participate in antiwar movements actively by attending rallies and giving speeches into her 90’s.
① 대학에서 생물학을 전공했다.
② 미국에서 국회의원으로 선출된 최초의 여성이었다.
③ 국회의원 중 유일하게 제1차 세계대전 참전에 반대했다.
④ 1943년에 선거에 다시 출마하지 않고 Montana로 돌아갔다.
⑤ 90대의 나이까지 반전운동에 참가했다.
25. ICCEF 직원 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 정규직 직원을 선발한다.
② 박사 이상의 학위가 필요하다.
③ 재무 회계 분야에서 2년 이상의 근무경력이 필요하다.
④ 주요업무 중 하나는 직원 연수를 제공하는 것이다.
⑤ 지원서는 직접 방문하여 접수해야 한다.
26. 
Charity Photography Competition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 대회에 참여하여 장애인을 도울 수 있다.
② 사진의 주제는 평화이다.
③ 출품작의 용량은 최대 10MB까지 가능하다.
④ 사진의 캡션은 심사 기준에 포함되지 않는다.
⑤ 참가비  수납 정보는  이메일을 통해 안내된다.
27. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The above graph shows the total U.S. primary energy production in 2011 and the percentage each energy source accounts for. ① The pie chart shows five different energy sources: natural gas, coal, petroleum, nuclear, and renewables, with the last of these divided into six further sub?categories. ② The percentage of natural gas, coal, and petroleum in total takes up more than two thirds of the total
U.S. primary energy production. ③ The data also reveals that nuclear power generation ranks last and is close behind renewables with a marginal difference of one percentage point. ④ In the category of renewable energy, biofuels and other biomass percentages combined are larger than half of the renewable energy produced while hydroelectric energy is the single largest source. ⑤ Meanwhile, the two lowest renewables, geothermal and solar, share the same percentage of two percent each.




영어 영역	5

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　It has been proposed that sleep functions to conserve energy. This may be particularly relevant for warm?blooded animals (mammals and birds) that must expend a lot of energy to maintain a body temperature higher than ① that of their surroundings. Indeed, many small mammals living in cold climates, who lose heat easily by having an  unfavorable surface area to body weight ratio, ② tending to sleep a lot, often in insulating burrows.  Yet  sleep  does not appear ③ to have evolved only in warm?blooded animals. Some studies on reptiles and amphibians indicate that they also sleep, and there are now strong indications of a sleep
?like state in some invertebrates, such as crayfish, fruit flies, and honey bees. Also, though it is true that the overall use of energy is reduced during sleep, as ④ compared with the active waking state, there is almost as much reduction in energy use from just resting quietly. The additional energy conservation in going from the resting state to sleep
⑤ is minimal.	* invertebrate: 무척추동물

29. 밑줄 친 he가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? According to Dr. Paul Ekman, a pioneer of lying research at UC San Francisco, here is an example of how difficult it is for children to grasp the qualifying role of intent in telling a lie. On the way home from school on Tuesday, a dad promises his five?year?old son that ① he will take him to the baseball game on Saturday afternoon. When they get home, Dad learns from Mom that earlier in the day she had scheduled a swim lesson for Saturday afternoon and can’t change it. When they tell their son, ② he gets terribly upset, and the situation melts down. Why is the kid so upset? Dad didn’t know about the swim lesson. By the adult definition,
③ he did not lie. But by the kid definition, ④ he did lie. Any false statement ― regardless of intent or belief ― is a lie. Therefore, unwittingly, Dad has given his child the message that ⑤ he approves of breaking promises.
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　The dominance of conclusions over arguments is most pronounced where emotions are involved. The psychologist Paul Slovic has proposed a theory in which people let their likes and dislikes determine their beliefs about the world. Your political ① preference determines the arguments that you find compelling. If you like the current health policy, you believe its benefits are substantial and its costs ② more manageable than the costs of alternatives. If you are a hawk in your attitude toward other nations, you probably think they are relatively weak and likely to ③ submit to your country’s will. If you are a dove, you probably think they are strong and will not be easily persuaded. Your emotional attitude to such things as red meat, nuclear power, tattoos, or motorcycles ④ follows your beliefs about their benefits and their risks. If you ⑤ dislike any of these things, you probably believe that its risks are high and its benefits negligible.

[31~33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Customers’ needs are usually expressed as high?level descriptions of the overall quality of a product or service. They are typically stated as adjectives and inherently do not imply a specific benefit to the customer. For instance, customers commonly say they want a product or service to be “reliable,” “effective,” “robust,” “dependable,” or “resilient.” Razor users may want the product to be “durable and strong.” Although these simple statements provide some indication as to what customers are looking for, they have one major drawback. They are   	                                                          and   present designers, developers, and engineers with the impossible task of figuring out just what customers really mean by “durable” or “strong.” If engineers faced the task of making a razor more “durable,” would they try to make the blade last longer, resist bending, or withstand constant moisture? Would any of these actions satisfy the customer’s true measure of “durable?” [3점]

① not appealing to female customers
② irrelevant to customers making purchases
③ preferable feedback for manufacturers only
④ ineffective in drawing consumers’ attention
⑤ imprecise statements open to interpretation




32. Many political scientists used to assume that people vote selfishly, choosing the candidate or policy that will benefit them the most. But decades of research on public opinion have led to the conclusion that self?interest is a weak predictor of policy preferences. Parents of children in public school are not more supportive of government aid to schools than other citizens, and young men subject to the draft are not more opposed to military escalation than men too old to be drafted. Rather, people care about their groups, whether those be racial, regional, or political. The political scientist Don Kinder summarizes the findings like this: “In matters of public opinion, citizens seem to be asking themselves not ‘What’s in it for me?’ but rather ‘What’s in it for my group?’” Political opinions 	. They’re like the array of bumper stickers people put on their cars showing the political causes, universities, and sports teams they support. Our politics is groupish, not selfish.

① continue to change over time
② correlate with parental concerns
③ serve as a means of self?display
④ function as badges of social membership
⑤ are just pie in the sky to ordinary people




6	영어 영역


33. In a study of complimenting behavior in American English, researchers discovered that one of the most striking features of compliments in American English is
 	. An initial examination of a large corpus revealed surprising repetitiveness in both the object of the compliments and the lexical items used to describe them. On closer investigation, it was discovered that regularities exist on all levels and that compliments are in fact formulas. We may categorize 80% of all compliments in the data as adjectival in that they depend on an adjective for their positive semantic value. In all, some seventy?two positive adjectives occur in the data. What is striking, however, is that of these seventy?two adjectives only five (nice, good, beautiful, pretty and great) are used with any frequency. While most adjectives occur only once or twice in the data, these five adjectives occur with such frequency that of all adjectival compliments in the corpus two thirds make use of only five adjectives. [3점]
* corpus: 언어 자료
① the foreign sounding qualities
② frequently misused adjectives
③ repetition of pitch patterns
④ an inherent ambiguity in meaning
⑤ the almost total lack of originality



34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Once most Americans got their water only from the tap. Now they often buy their water in bottles. But bottled water costs 80 cents to $4.00 per gallon, while tap water costs only pennies per day. Is the extra expense worth it? Although the FDA sets regulations specifically for bottled water to ensure that	it	is	safe,	the	Environmental	Protection			Agency’s standards for tap water are actually higher. 			(A)			, bottled water is permitted to contain certain amounts of any bacteria. Tap water, in contrast, cannot contain any of the dangerous bacteria. Also, there are no federal filtration or disinfection requirements for bottled water, as there are for tap water. The chlorine used to treat tap water continues to kill harmful bacteria, while bottled water contains no such disinfectant to prevent bacterial growth. 	(B)					, tap water  is  actually  healthier  in  some  respects.	It		usually contains fluoride, along with other minerals ― such as calcium and iron ― that are beneficial to the body.
* chlorine: 염소 ** fluoride: 플루오린 화합물
(A) (B)
① For example …… Furthermore
② For example …… On the contrary
③ Nevertheless …… Consequently
④ Nevertheless      ……    Similarly
⑤ In other words    ……   However
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Despite all the increasingly user?friendly and popular technology, most studies published since the early 1990s confirm earlier conclusions: paper still has advantages over screens as a reading medium. ① Together, laboratory experiments, polls, and consumer reports indicate that digital devices prevent people from efficiently navigating long texts, which may subtly inhibit reading comprehension. ② Compared with paper, screens may also drain more of our mental resources while we are reading and make it a little harder to remember what we read when we are done. ③ Whether they realize it or not, people often approach computers and tablets with a state of mind less beneficial to learning than the one they bring to paper. ④ They are favoring digital devices, as reading digital texts for facts and fun becomes more common.
⑤ E?readers also fail to recreate certain tactile experiences of reading on paper, the absence of which some find unsettling.




[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) A tree is tall relative to our average human size. In this way, categories of mind are defined by the body’s interaction with the environment. We call such features of conceptual categories “interactional properties.”
(B) As an example, take the conceptual category of TREE. How can the body play any role in our understanding what a tree is? For one thing, we understand a tree as being upright.
(C) This comes from how we experience our own bodies; namely, that we experience ourselves as being erect. For another, we see a tree as tall. The aspect of tallness only makes sense with respect to our standard evaluation of the body’s relative height. [3점]

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) Probably folks might like the idea of that, but they won’t necessarily bother to leave the house to go vote for it. People don’t care about traffic unless they are stuck in it and missing their children’s soccer practice.

(B) A few years ago I was involved in a campaign for a bill to fund an extra lane for a local freeway. The county wanted to run promotional ads for the bill promising to “improve our roads” and “reduce commute time.”

(C) A better approach was to run ads asking, “Wouldn’t it be nice to get to your child’s practice on time for once?” or, “Wouldn’t you like to get home early enough to have dinner with your family every night?” That helped voters picture exactly how the expanded freeway would improve their lives.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Parallel to new trends in the natural sciences and humanities, the realists focused on fact and perception, thus rejecting art that was based only on imaginary worlds. ( ① ) However, they never sought to simply imitate reality since that would have been easier with photography, which had just recently been invented. ( ② ) Instead, painters like Gustave  Courbet,  Adolf  von  Menzel,  Jean?Fran?ois  Millet,  and Honor? Daumier wanted to illustrate social conditions within their art. ( ③ ) In particular, artists chose motifs taken from industrial and rural worlds of life and labor. ( ④ ) Previously, these subjects had been handled at most in small, anecdotal genre paintings. ( ⑤ ) It portrayed an ordinary funeral and the rural mourners on a monumental scale, challenging the accepted norms of the art establishment at that time.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　“We have two kinds of attention,” says Andrea Faber Taylor, an environmental psychologist at the University of Illinois. The first is the “directed attention” we call on for tasks that require focus, like driving or doing our taxes.   ( ① ) Directed attention tends to be tiring, however, and fatigue affects our ability to make good decisions and control destructive impulses. ( ② ) The best way to restore directed attention is to give it a rest by shifting to the second type, “involuntary attention,” which we display when we meditate. ( ③ ) For example, Roger Ulrich at Texas A&M University found that people who commuted along scenic roads recovered more quickly from stressful driving conditions than those who saw billboards, buildings, and parking lots. ( ④ ) Ulrich also looked at patients recovering from surgery. ( ⑤ ) The patients who could see trees from their hospital beds needed fewer painkillers and had shorter hospital stays than those who looked out on brick walls.










(A) (B)
① ruin	……	inaction
② ruin	……	nervousness
③ hinder	……	depression
④ raise	……	ambition
⑤ raise	……	satisfaction




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 





(C) 

(D) 






41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Loneliness in the Company of Others
② The Two?edged Sword of Politeness
③ Everybody’s Friend Is Nobody’s Friend
④ Feeling Blue? It’s an Innate Human Trait
⑤ Interpretations of Politeness in Different Cultures
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① silence	② dialogue
③ curiosity	④ impatience
⑤ involvement


[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)	③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)	⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. 위 글의 Glenn에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 여덟 살 때 교실 난로에 불을 지피는 일을 했다.
② 화재로 형을 잃었다.
③ 사고로 오른쪽 다리가 왼쪽보다 거의 3인치 짧아졌다.
④ 1마일 경주에서 세계기록을 세웠다.
⑤ 부모님은 그의 다리 절단에 동의했다.








제 3 교시

2014학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
1




6. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.





1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It is their first wedding anniversary.
② I already visited the place yesterday.
③ They’re planning to buy new furniture.
④ I’m going to sing a song for the couple.
⑤ They started getting interested in fashion.


2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s okay. I’m not in a terrible hurry.
② Thanks. I’ll put a screen protector on it.
③ I told you. The screen is working all right.
④ I see. I’ll mail the letter as soon as possible.
⑤ Are you sure? The fee is higher than I expected.

3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장기간 외출 시 문단속을 당부하려고
② 게시판의 적극적인 활용을 권장하려고
③ 편의 시설 설치에 대한 의견을 수렴하려고
④ 입주자 대표 회의에 참석할 것을 독려하려고
⑤ 전등 교체를 위한 재방문 일정을 공지하려고

4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
① 빛의 색깔에 따른 다양한 정서적 반응
② 스마트 기기 중독과 집중력 사이의 관계
③ 늦은 밤 스마트 기기 사용으로 인한 수면 장애
④ 환경호르몬이 인체에 흡수되는 것을 막는 방법
⑤ 지속적인 수면 부족이 정신 건강에 미치는 영향


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 주름의 생성 과정
② 주름이 생기는 원인
③ 주름의 긍정적 기능
④ 주름을 예방하는 방법
⑤ 노화와 주름의 상관관계

① 프레젠테이션 시각 자료는 간결해야 한다.
② 큰 화면을 활용하여 프레젠테이션을 해야 한다.
③ 프레젠테이션 준비는 충분한 시간을 두고 해야 한다.
④ 장소를 고려하여 프레젠테이션 자료를 제작해야 한다.
⑤ 프레젠테이션은 주제에서 벗어나지 않도록 해야 한다.

7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 의사 - 신문 기자	② 서점 직원 - 고객
③ 작가 - 출판사 직원	④ 도서관 사서 ? 학생
⑤ 트레이너 - 운동선수

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자전거 수리하기	② 인라인 스케이트 구입하기
③ 차고 물건 정리하기	④ 인라인 스케이트 청소하기
⑤ 자전거 상태 점검하기

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 셔츠를 구입하지 않은 이유를 고르시오.
① 품질이 좋지 않아서	② 원하는 치수가 없어서
③ 점원이 친절하지 않아서	④ 할인 판매를 하지 않아서
⑤ 디자인이 마음에 들지 않아서

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90	② $150	③ $270	④ $300	⑤ $330

1 . Student of the Year Award에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 성적이 우수하고 리더십이 뛰어난 학생에게 수여한다.
② 지원자는 담임 교사의 추천을 받아야 한다.
③ 수상자는 다음 학기 전액 장학금을 받는다.
④ 시상식은 7월 25일에 시청에서 열린다.
⑤ 올해 시상식에는 시장이 참석할 예정이다.

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을 고르시오.
Dishwashers

①
②
③
④
⑤


	

2 영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man: 	
① Never mind. I can take care of them for you.
② That’s true. Your cousin must be happy for you.
③ Of course. I have to take a business trip instead.
④ Don’t worry. I’ll soon get back to my normal routine.
⑤ I don’t buy it. Fish aren’t smart enough to recognize you.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: 	

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① Would you help me achieve my dreams?
② Okay. Maybe I’ll buy a dream next time.
③ Does that mean we can interpret dreams?
④ Right. A lot of worries can lead to dreams.
⑤ It’s amazing that you remember your dreams.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ted가 Minhee에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ted: 	
① When do you want me to come over and help you?
② What is the Korean dish eaten at birthday parties?
③ How long have you lived here since you left Korea?
④ Could you tell me how to cook seaweed soup in detail?
⑤ Would my cousin like it if I made seaweed soup for her?


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① why we need to play team sports regularly
② the psychological benefits of playing sports
③ the role of sports in preventing heart disease
④ the importance of controlling emotions in sports
⑤ how to make your body healthier through sports

17. 언급된 스포츠가 아닌 것은?
① 수영	② 테니스	③ 축구
④ 농구	⑤ 배구





① 신설된 통학버스의 운행시간을 안내하려고
② 통학버스의 변경된 탑승 장소를 공지하려고
③ 등하교 시 적극적인 통학버스 이용을 권장하려고
④ 통학버스 정류장에 미리 나와 줄 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 통학버스 이용 만족도 조사에 참여하도록 독려하려고


19. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Child-rearing experts always caution parents not to tell children they’re bad when they misbehave, but rather to scold them for doing bad things. This concept applies to adults, as well. Good people occasionally do bad things, and bad people sometimes behave like angels. In looking for patterns, it is critical not to confuse occasional behavior or feelings with a more permanent personality trait or quality. If you’re considering rehiring someone who worked for you a few years earlier, you’d be wise to recall your past experience with him. But you’d be ill-advised to base the decision on a single occasion when he disagreed with you, unless you saw other behavior that indicated he was argumentative by nature. Isolated episodes don’t usually reveal a permanent state of mind. As you search for patterns, ask yourself whether the clue you are evaluating is just an isolated event.
① 단편적인 모습으로 그 사람을 판단해서는 안 된다.
② 시대의 변화에 따라 자녀 양육 방식도 달라져야 한다.
③ 옳고 그름을 판단하는 기준은 사람마다 다를 수 있다.
④ 성과보다는 성장 가능성을 고려하여 사람을 평가해야 한다.
⑤ 겉으로 드러난 자녀의 행동만으로 잘잘못을 따져서는 안 된다.




영어 영역	3

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Do you know what fear and doubt fear? Community. One of fear and doubt’s chief aims is to make you feel alone, like you’re the only one who feels a certain way. Fear wants to isolate you and put you on an island. As long as you keep your fear to yourself, no one can tell you the truth about it. No one can help you see what is really going on. No one can encourage you. So if you’re going to tell your voices, “Go away,” you’ve got to share them with other people. You’ve got to tell your close friends or family or a counselor about your voices. The exact person will be different for everyone, but never waste time trying to battle a voice alone. In some cases that voice of fear and doubt will have had a ten-year head start on you. Don’t go it alone.
① 두려움과 의심을 주변 사람과 나누어라.
② 새로운 도전에 대한 두려움과 의심을 버려라.
③ 외로움을 극복하려면 혼자 있는 시간을 즐겨라.
④ 자신의 목소리를 낮추고 함께하는 삶을 추구하라.
⑤ 어떤 상황에서도 진실을 말할 수 있는 용기를 가져라.











21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 When we experience life’s setbacks and feel down, something strange happens. In a kind of relationship reflex, our bodies automatically begin to send signals to attract loving care from another person. Our eyelids droop, our gazes turn downward, our shoulders drop, and our faces seem to say, “Doesn’t anyone see how sad I am? Doesn’t anyone want to help me?” Conversely, something within us causes us to be attracted to those who seem in distress and who are flashing their depression displays. We may respond by saying, “Are you okay?” or “You look like you’re carrying the burdens of the world on your back,” or “You look like you could use a shoulder to lean on.” When we are wilted and drooping, our sadness signals are received by others who are strangely attracted by our messages.
① How Our Bodies Express Our Excitement
② The Depression Display: A Strange Attractor
③ A Step Toward Ideal Relationships with Others
④ Body Language: A Way of Hiding Your Emotions
⑤ Facial Expressions: Indicators of a Health Disorder

2 . 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 When our minds are at ease, we’re more likely to direct the spotlight of attention inward, toward the stream of remote associations coming from the right hemisphere of our brains. In contrast, when we are diligently focused, our attention tends to be directed outward, toward the details of the problems we’re trying to solve. While this pattern of attention is necessary when solving problems analytically, it actually prevents us from detecting the connections that lead to creative insights. “That’s why so many insights happen during warm showers,” Subhra Bhattacharya, a well-known psychologist, says. “For many people, it’s the most relaxing part of the day.” It’s not until we’re being massaged by warm water, unable to check our e-mail, that we’re finally able to hear the quiet voices in the backs of our heads telling us about the insight.
① the disadvantages of inward directed attention
② the risk of being distracted by what arises in your mind
③ ways of staying focused on the problem solving process
④ positive effects of warm showers on emotional well-being
⑤ the importance of a relaxed state of mind for reaching insights





23. 다음 글의 (A) ~ (C)에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말을 바르게 짝지은 것은?
[3점]
　Entropy is a measure of disorder or randomness. Physicists have given a fully (A) qualitative / quantitative definition to entropy that allows one to describe something’s entropy by using a definite numerical value: larger numbers mean greater entropy, smaller numbers mean less entropy. Although the details are a little complicated, this number, roughly speaking, counts the possible rearrangements of the
(B) concepts / ingredients in a given physical system that leave its overall appearance intact. When your desk is neat and clean, almost any arrangement ― changing the order of the newspapers, books, or articles, moving the pens from their holders ― will upset its highly ordered organization. This accounts for its having low entropy. On the contrary, when your desk is a mess, numerous rearrangements of the newspapers, articles, and junk mail will leave it a mess and therefore will not (C) disturb / maintain its overall look. This accounts for its having high entropy.
(A) (B)	(C)
① qualitative …… concepts …… disturb
② qualitative …… ingredients …… maintain
③ quantitative ……  ingredients  …… maintain
④ quantitative …… concepts   …… maintain
⑤ quantitative …… ingredients …… disturb


	

4	영어 영역

24. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
 In some communities, music and performance have successfully transformed whole neighborhoods as ① profoundly as The Guggenheim Museum did in Bilbao. In Salvador, Brazil, musician Carlinhos Brown established several music and culture centers in formerly dangerous neighborhoods. In Candeal, ② where Brown was born, local kids were encouraged to join drum groups, sing, and stage performances. The kids, energized by these activities, ③ began to turn away from dealing drugs. Being a young criminal was no longer their only life option. Being musicians and playing together in a group looked like more fun and was more ④ satisfying. Little by little, the crime rate dropped in those neighborhoods; the hope returned. In another slum area, possibly inspired by Brown’s example, a culture center began to encourage the local kids to stage musical events, some of ⑤ them dramatized the tragedy that they were still recovering from.
25. 다음 글에 드러난 Cusi의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 At the opposite side of the valley, a narrow steep road led into the sloping hills. Along this road there now appeared two round glaring eyes. They would appear and disappear and appear again, each time rounder, more glaring, larger. Cusi was terrified. Itmustbeananimalfromanotherworld. The lights                                     came nearer and nearer with a strange noise and a still stranger smell. Then they disappeared completely. Chuto quietly laughed, looking down at Cusi’s set face. “Come,” he said to the boy. Cusi made himself follow the old Inca man across the terraces to the beginning of the road. “They call this thing a truck,” Chuto explained. “It won’t hurt you. It has wheels instead of feet. It has a motor instead of a heart. It has bad-smelling blood by the name of gasoline.” Cusi could finally catch his breath and feel more at ease.
① pleased	→ nervous	② hopeless	→ encouraged
③ indifferent → curious	④ interested → disappointed
⑤ frightened → relieved
26. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? The cottage of a poor man named Nicholas happened to stand in a place which was overgrown with wild bushes. ① He lay down under the shade of a hazel tree upon a hot day, about the time of harvest. A farmer passed close by ② him with a cart
heavily loaded with corn. With envious eyes Nicholas looked at the cart full of corn, and barely said “Good morning” to the farmer. ③ He, however, stopped, and said to Nicholas, “If from this land, which is your property, you would cultivate daily as many feet as you cover with your lazy body, you would reap every year much more corn than you see upon the cart here.” Nicholas paid attention to this advice. ④ He rooted up bushes, and worked upon the soil. It cost Nicholas not a single penny, and placed ⑤ him and his family in affluent circumstances.

27. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The graph above shows the best advertising sources that US consumers and marketers chose in October 2012 when they were permitted to select up to two choices. ① According to survey findings, more than 40 percent of both consumers and marketers rated Newspapers and TV as the best source for advertising. ② As for Family and Friends as an advertising source, the percentage gap between the preferences of consumers and marketers was biggest, at nine percent. ③ On the other hand, consumers and marketers showed only a one percent difference in their preference for Company websites.
④ Among all the advertising sources listed, News websites were chosen by a smaller proportion of marketers than consumers. ⑤ Marketers did not name Blogs as one of their top two choices, while four percent of consumers favored them as an advertising source.


28. Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 The Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road is something to behold in the Barren Lands of the North. It is the supply route to highly profitable diamond mines in the remote Canadian wilderness, stretching approximately six hundred kilometers. Approximately 80 percent of the ice road consists of frozen lakes. The road is built by a joint venture of mining companies operating in the area, and shared by many users, from exploration companies to native hunters of the region. This seasonal winter road is only open for eight to nine weeks each year, from February to the beginning of April depending on weather and the season’s load requirements. During the rest of the year, the mines can be reached only by air. Travel time on the ice road is generally around 14 hours and speed of vehicles is carefully controlled to protect the ice.
① 캐나다 다이아몬드 광산으로 연결된 물자 보급로이다.
② 대략 80퍼센트가 얼어붙은 호수로 이루어져 있다.
③ 지역 사냥꾼들의 이용이 통제된다.
④ 일 년에 8주에서 9주 정도 개방된다.
⑤ 얼음을 보호하기 위해 차량 속도가 제한된다.




영어 영역	5

29. 2014 Community Bird Day Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 텃새의 날을 기념하기 위한 행사이다.
② 오전과 오후로 나뉘어 진행된다.
③ 지역 주민 회관에서 진행될 예정이다.
④ 새를 주제로 한 다양한 단편 영화를 상영한다.
⑤ 조류 보호 단체를 후원하기 위해 입장료를 받는다.

[30 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. The saying that 	is captured in a study in which researchers wrote up a detailed description of a half inning of baseball and gave it to a group of baseball fanatics and a group of less enthusiastic fans to read. Afterward they tested how well their subjects could recall the half inning. The baseball fanatics structured their recollections around important game-related events, like runners advancing and runs scored. One almost got the impression they were reading off an internal scorecard. The less enthusiastic fans remembered fewer important facts about the game and were more likely to recount superficial details like the weather. Because they lacked a detailed internal representation of the game, they couldn’t process the information they were taking in. They didn’t know what was important and what was trivial. They couldn’t know what mattered. Without a conceptual framework in which to embed what they were learning, they were extremely forgetful. [3점]
① it takes knowledge to gain knowledge
② intelligence is much more than mere memory
③ imagination pushes the boundaries of knowledge
④ learning takes place everywhere and at all times
⑤ prejudice is an obstacle to processing information





31. Love is an attitude, an orientation of character which
 	, not toward one ‘object’ of love. If a person loves only one other person and is indifferent to the rest of his fellow men, his love is not love but a symbiotic attachment, or an enlarged egotism. Yet, most people believe that love is constituted by the object, not by the faculty. They believe that all that is necessary to find is the right object ― and that everything goes by itself afterward. This attitude can be compared to that of a man who wants to paint but who, instead of learning the art, claims that he has just to wait for the right object, and that he will paint beautifully when he finds it. If I truly love one person, I love all persons, I love the world, and I love life. If I can say to somebody else, “I love you,” I must be able to say, “I love in you everybody, I love through you the world, and I love in you also myself.” [3점]
* symbiotic: 공생의, 공생하는
① is closely related to intense attachment to oneself
② directs one’s resentment and anger toward oneself
③ has as its ultimate goal to add variety to a person’s life
④ primarily serves to guide an individual toward a specific goal
⑤ determines the relatedness of a person to the world as a whole



6	영어 영역

32. A great example of how potent a force your unconscious can be was detailed by researchers in a 2006 paper published in the journal Science. They conducted a study in which people were asked to remember a terrible sin from their past, something they had done which was unethical. The researchers asked them to describe how the memory made them feel. They then offered half of the participants the opportunity to wash their hands. At the end of the study, they asked subjects if they would be willing to take part in later research for no pay as a favor to a desperate graduate student. Those who did not wash their hands agreed to help 74 percent of the time, but those who did wash agreed only 41 percent of the time. According to the researchers, one group had unconsciously 	and felt less of a need to pay the debts of their sins. The people in the study connected their hand washing with all the ideas of cleanliness associated with the act, and then those associations influenced their behavior.
① lost their spontaneity
② helped people in need
③ washed away their guilt
④ weakened their confidence
⑤ forgotten their participation






3 . Some people believe that you can’t change human nature, and thus they see the idea of an evolving human consciousness as no more than unwarranted idealism. Yet, what is human nature? The dictionary defines nature as the inherent character or basic constitution of a person or thing ? its essence. But does the inherent character and essence of a person ever change? We can gain insight into this key issue by asking an analogous question: Does the inherent character of a seed change when it grows into a tree? Not at all. The potential for becoming a tree was always resident within the seed. When a seed grows into a tree, it represents only a change in the degree to which its potential, always inherent in its original nature, is realized. Similarly, human nature does not change; yet, like the seed with the potential of becoming a tree, human nature is 	. We human beings can grow from a primitive to an enlightened condition without a change in our basic human nature. [3점]
① not only an inherent trait but a social product
② not a static thing but a spectrum of potentials
③ fertile soil with the potential to nurture creativity
④ a stepping stone as well as a handicap to the future
⑤ the result of interaction between mankind and nature
34. 
The ability to see the situation as the other side sees it, as difficult as it may be, is one of the most important skills a negotiator can possess. It is not enough to know that they see things differently. If you want to influence them, you also need to understand empathetically the power of their point of view and to feel the emotional force with which they believe in it. It is not enough to study them  like beetles under a microscope; you need to know
 	. To accomplish this task you should be prepared to withhold judgment for a while as you “try on” their views. They may well believe that their views are right as strongly as you believe yours are. You may see on the table a glass half full of cool water. Your spouse may see a dirty, half-empty glass about to cause a mark on the expensive furniture.
① what it feels like to be a beetle
② how scientists use the equipment
③ where you can find the right beetle
④ why a beetle is an important specimen
⑤ when an awkward situation takes place




[35 ~ 36] 다음 글의 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말을 바르게 짝지은 것을 고르시오.
35. Costs vary not only with the volume of output, and to varying degrees from one industry to another, they also vary according  to the  extent  to  which  existing   (A)    is being used. When an airplane with 200 seats is about to take off with 180 passengers on board, the cost of letting 20 standby passengers get on the flight is negligible. That is one reason for radically different prices being charged to people flying on the same plane. Some passengers bought guaranteed reservations and others essentially bought a chance of getting on board as standbys. Different levels of probability have different costs in airline tickets, as elsewhere. The passengers themselves also differ in how important it is for them to be at a particular place at a particular time. Those on urgent business may want a guaranteed reservation, even at a higher price, while others may be  in  a position where (B) money  is  more important than being on one particular flight rather than another. [3점]
(A) (B)
① capacity
……
saving
② property
……
raising
③ equipment
……
investing
④ technology
……
saving
⑤ information
……
raising




영어 영역	7

36. A snack with the label “99% natural” seems more appealing than it would if labeled “1% unnatural.” A frozen dinner labeled “75% fat free” would sell better than it would with the label “25% fat.” The less appealing labeling option is just as accurate as the more appealing option. It also makes us reflect more about what we might be eating. (A) , bets sound less appealing when framed in terms of the chances of losing or the amount of money one might lose, rather than the chances of winning or the amount of money one would win. Medical procedures may sound scarier when presented in terms of the risk of dying, rather than the likelihood of coming through unharmed. (B) , it is a useful exercise to recompute losses in terms of gains or gains in terms of losses.
(A) (B)
① Similarly …… Therefore
② Similarly …… Nevertheless
③ Instead …… In addition
④ However …… For example
⑤ However …… In other words

37. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Like any other organ or system in the body, bone becomes stronger when it is stressed regularly, and it becomes weak when it is not used enough. ① In this case, “stressed” means loaded through impact and tension, as occurs during running.
② For the best explanation of bones becoming weak, take a look at astronauts. ③ Their bones are unloaded and not used much during lengthy stays in the zero-gravity environment of space. ④ As people age, the body starts to reabsorb calcium from the bones, leading to loss of bone mass. ⑤ When they arrive back on Earth, their bones are often so weak that they can barely support the astronaut’s body weight.

38. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

39. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

(A) However, the number of differently labeled segments we use varies. Some languages only distinguish between two basic colors, black and white. Others add green, yellow, blue, and brown.
(B) Language has a significant effect on how we “see” colors
― more precisely, on how we divide up and label different parts of the visible spectrum. Our eyes register roughly the same range of light between the aptly named infrared and ultraviolet.
(C) This sort of different color categorization is nicely illustrated by the word “grue.” Psychologists use it to describe languages that make no distinction between green and blue.
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





 If leadership is the ability to create change your organization believes in, and the market demands change, then the market demands leaders, not managers. ( ① ) Managers manage by using the authority the factory gives them, and you listen to your manager to avoid losing your job. ( ② ) A manager can’t make change because that’s not his job; his job is to complete tasks assigned to him by someone else in the factory. ( ③ ) They use passion and ideas to lead people, as opposed to using threats and bureaucracy to manage them. ( ④ ) Leaders must become aware of how the organization works, because this awareness allows them to change it. ( ⑤ ) Leadership doesn’t always start at the top, but it always manages to affect the folks at the top.



?


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① solitary	…… violence	② solitary …… cooperation
③ positive	…… conflict	④ positive …… bonding
⑤ incomplete …… attraction




8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



(B)



(C)
(D) 






41. 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① Work Less: You’ll Get More Done
② Take a Chance, Make Your Choice
③ How Specific Should Your Plans Be?
④ How to Tune in to Your Academic Needs
⑤ Daily Planning: The Key to Academic Success

42. 밑줄 친 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 말은?
① demands	② contacts	③ adjustments
④ contributions	⑤ appointments

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞도록 바르게 배열한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)
4 . (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 다른 하나는?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. John에 대한 내용으로 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 멘토 프로그램 참여를 제안 받았다.
② 소속 팀이 선수권 대회에서 우승을 차지했다.
③ Randy를 소속 팀의 주장으로 임명해 줄 것을 요청했다.
④ Randy를 도서관에 데려가서 개인지도를 했다.
⑤ 전액 체육 특기생 장학금을 받고 대학에 진학했다.




2014학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 - 미술 교사	② 미술 치료사 - 학부모
③ 기자 - 미술 평론가	④ 미술 용품점 주인 - 화가
⑤ 관람객 - 미술관 직원

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I know. It’s not easy to make good spaghetti.
② Exactly. I’ll do something to reduce food waste.
③ Yes. Making a shopping list helps to save money.
④ Not at all. I’m pretty sure it won’t last for a week.
⑤ You’re right. We should have family meals more often.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll help you find an interesting topic.
② I’m glad that you came to my art presentation.
③ You’ll learn a lot about art through the presentation.
④ Don’t worry. Your presentation was not boring at all.
⑤ I have no idea why the presentation schedule was changed.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 새로운 헬스 기구의 사용법을 설명하려고
② 교내 헬스장에서 지켜야 할 예절을 강조하려고
③ 체력 증진을 위한 교내 헬스장 이용을 독려하려고
④ 헬스장 이용 시 준비 운동을 할 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 교내 헬스장 보수 공사 일정을 공지하려고



4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 휴대용 컴퓨터의 손상 방지책
② 휴대용 컴퓨터 보안 관리의 필요성
③ 휴대용 컴퓨터의 주변 기기 관리 요령
④ 휴대용 컴퓨터 사용 증가로 인한 문제점
⑤ 휴대용 컴퓨터 종류에 따른 용도와 특징



5. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학교 도서관의 시설 확충이 시급하다.
② 학생들의 도서관 이용을 장려해야 한다.
③ 학교 도서관에 최신 도서를 구비해야 한다.
④ 다양한 분야의 책을 균형 있게 읽어야 한다.
⑤ 올바른 정보 습득을 위한 교육을 강화해야 한다.


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 해야 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 샘플 상품 요청하기	② 계약 조건 확인하기
③ 시장 수요 조사하기	④ 출장 일정 점검하기
⑤ 출장 보고서 작성하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 이사 가려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 직장을 옮겨서	② 침실이 더 많이 필요해서
③ 주차 공간이 협소해서	④ 난방비가 많이 나와서
⑤ 자녀의 통학 거리가 멀어서


9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



10.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $800	② $950	③ $1,300	④ $1,450	⑤ $2,150


1.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을 고르시오.

White Beach Aquarium: Daily Programs


①
②
③
④
⑤




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.2014 Photography Seminar에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 6월 1일부터 6일 동안 열리는 행사이다.
② 100명이 넘는 강사가 다양한 전문 분야를 다룰 예정이다.
③ 최신 사진 장비에 대한 설명이 있을 것이다.
④ 전화와 이메일을 통해 예약이 가능하다.
⑤ 사진 전공 학생에게는 할인 혜택이 주어진다.

13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① No thanks. We have cancelled the bazaar.
② Yes, the bazaar was successful thanks to you.
③ Sorry, but I’m too busy to volunteer at the bazaar.
④ Please help me become the director of the school bazaar.
⑤ It’ll be nice of you to ask other teachers for participation.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry to hear you have so much stress.
② It must be difficult to work as an office worker.
③ It’s impressive that you keep challenging yourself.
④ I don’t know why you want to start a new business.
⑤ You need to spend less money at a fancy restaurant.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Benny가  운전자에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Benny: Excuse me.  	
① I’m looking for the entrance to the mall.
② I’ve been waiting to take this parking space.
③ Please help me carry this grocery to my car.
④ You should turn off your blinkers after parking.
⑤ I’m afraid there’s something wrong with your tire.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① factors causing movie mistakes
② expansion of the movie industry
③ using movies for learning history
④ strategies for casting good actors
⑤ history of commercial film-making

17.영화 제작과 관련하여 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 예산	② 촬영지	③ 의상
④ 특수 효과	⑤ 소품

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 빈번한 쓰레기 미수거에 대해 항의하려고
② 구입한 물품의 배송 지연에 대해 문의하려고
③ 재활용 쓰레기 수거 일정의 변경을 요청하려고
④ 지역 환경 보호 운동을 선도한 것에 대해 감사하려고
⑤ 종이 재활용 프로그램 운영에 필요한 물품 기부를 부탁하려고







19.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Mr. Aryeh noticed a young boy coming to school in old worn-out shoes. Clearly ① he needed a new pair, but Mr. Aryeh also knew that the boy’s father, a proud man, would be humiliated and offended if ② his son were treated as a charity case and given a pair. How does a person with moral imagination provide a boy with shoes, while not paining his father’s soul? During a morning recess break, Mr. Aryeh called the boy to his office because, he said, he needed to test ③ him on his English proficiency. He asked the boy several questions, well within the youth’s grasp. “Wonderful!” Mr. Aryeh said when the boy answered correctly. He gave
④ the youngster two notes: one to be brought to a local shoemaker, with instructions to give the boy a good pair of shoes, for which Mr. Aryeh would pay; the second, a note to the boy’s father telling ⑤ him about the “prize” his son had won.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Most people get trapped in their optimistic biases, so they tend to listen to positive feedback and ignore negative feedback. Although this may help them come across as confident to others, in any area of competence (e.g., education, business, sports or performing arts) achievement is 10% performance and 90% preparation. Thus, the more aware you are of your weaknesses, the better prepared you will be. Low self-confidence may turn you into a pessimist, but when pessimism teams up with ambition it often produces outstanding performance. To be the very best at anything, you will need to be your harshest critic, and that is almost impossible when your starting point is high self-confidence. Exceptional achievers always experience low levels of confidence and self-confidence, but they train hard and practice continually until they reach an acceptable level of competence.
① Never Reveal Your Weaknesses
② Negative Comments Are Harmful
③ The Risk of Ambition Without Effort
④ The Less Confident Are More Successful
⑤ High Self-Confidence Leads to Better Achievement










21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A painter I know can’t do anything in her studio without rock’n’roll pounding out of the speakers. Turning it on turns on a switch inside her. The beat gets her going. It’s the metronome for her creative life. A writer friend can only write outside. He can’t stand the thought of being tied indoors to his word processor while a “great day” is unfolding outside. So he carries his coffee mug out to work in the warmth of an open porch in his backyard. Mystically, he now believes he is missing nothing. In the end, there is no one ideal condition for creativity. What works for one person is useless for another. The only criterion is this: Make it easy on yourself. Find a working environment where the prospect of wrestling with your muse doesn’t scare you, doesn’t shut you down. It should make you want to be there, and once you find it, stick with it.
* muse: (예술적) 영감을 주는 신
① 집중적인 노력은 창의력 향상의 바탕이 된다.
② 음악 감상을 통해 창조적 영감을 얻을 수 있다.
③ 창작 활동을 위해 일과 휴식의 균형이 필요하다.
④ 창조적 활동을 위한 각자에게 맞는 작업 환경이 있다.
⑤ 창조적 영감은 예상치 않은 순간에 떠오르기도 한다.

2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Our essentially subtropical body isn’t well suited to life in the Arctic because we don’t have the fur of polar bears or the thick, insulating fat of sea mammals. But we can make fur clothing, shelters to contain warmth, and weapons with which to hunt and defend ourselves. These items are good examples of cultural adaptation, which show how culture is used to survive the natural world. Keep in mind, though, that people must also survive the cultural world they inhabit, and that is just as important. For example, if you don’t greet your neighbors the right way, you may cause bad feelings; in the same way, your grandfather may not appreciate your elaborate, back-slapping handshake the way your buddy does. So although culture does help you survive the natural world, it also tells you how to survive the cultural world of social interactions.
① ways to improve biological adaptation
② the use of culture for human survival
③ genetic factors to reduce human adaptability
④ the influence of instruction on human survival
⑤ the role of communication in social interactions







23.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적 절한 것은?
　When discussing the animal kingdom, each creature belongs to a species scale of generalists to specialists. Specialist creatures like the koala bear can only survive on an extremely (A) limited / variable set of conditions: diet (eucalyptus), climate (warm), environment (trees). Generalists, on the other hand (think mice), are able to survive just about anywhere. They can (B) dread / withstand heat and cold, eat your organic breakfast cereal or seeds and berries in the wild. So, specialist species thrive only when conditions are perfect. They serve a very specific purpose within their particular ecosystem and are good at navigating it. However, should those conditions change ? as a result of nature or, more commonly, an outside force ? specialist species often become (C) extinct / widespread . In contrast, mice can move from spot to spot on the globe, adapt to different cultures, diets and weather systems. And most importantly, they stay alive.
(A) (B)	(C)
① limited	dread	extinct
② limited	withstand	widespread
③ limited	withstand	extinct
④ variable	withstand	widespread
⑤ variable	dread	widespread




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

24.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
　In the 1970s, when schools began allowing students to use portable calculators, many parents ① objected. They worried that a reliance on the machines would weaken their children’s grasp of mathematical concepts. The fears, subsequent studies showed, were largely ② unneeded. No longer forced to spend a lot of time on routine calculations, many students gained a deeper understanding of the principles underlying their exercises. Today, the story of the calculator is often used to support the argument that our growing dependence on online databases is ③ disadvantageous. In freeing us from the work of remembering, it’s said, the Web allows us to devote more time to creative thought. The pocket calculator
④ relieved the pressure on our working memory, letting us use that critical short-term store for more abstract reasoning. The calculator, a powerful but highly specialized tool, turned out to be an ⑤ aid to our working memory.



25.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　I remember one of the smartest I.T. executives ① for whom I ever worked strongly resisting the movement to measure programmer productivity that was popular at the time. He was fond of saying that the biggest problem with managing computer programmers is that you can never tell ② whether they are working by looking at them. Picture two programmers working side by side. One is leaning back in his chair with his eyes ③ closed and his feet on the desk. The other is working hard, typing code into his computer. The one with his feet up could be thinking, and the other one may be too busy typing
④ to give it enough thought. In the end, the busy typist could well produce ten times as many lines of code as the thinker, which contain twice as many new problems as the thinker’s. Unfortunately, most of the productivity measurement schemes I have encountered ⑤ measuring effort or apparent activity. They would reward him and punish his thoughtful neighbor.



26.San Miniato에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　San Miniato is a town of about 26,000 that sits atop three hills in the Arno river valley in Tuscany, Italy. The town’s history is deeply rooted in its function as an important stop along the trading route between France and Italy. To protect its historic building character, the city has set detailed criteria for the installation of signs, plaques, and posters and has revised its street signs. To protect views of the town and to limit visual intrusions, the city has made strict regulations about the construction of cell phone towers. To accommodate visitors and tourists and not intrude on the urban layout and design, the town has built an underground parking lot with an elevator to the city center.

① Arno강 유역의 구릉지에 위치한다.
② 프랑스와 이탈리아의 교역로에 위치한 중요한 기착지였다.
③ 건물의 역사성 보존을 위해 간판 설치의 세부 기준을 정했다.
④ 도시 미관을 위해 이동 전화 송신탑 설치에 관한 엄격한 규정 을 마련했다.
⑤ 도심에 지하 주차장을 건설하려는 계획을 취소했다.






27.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한 곳은?

　Forests have always had a role in human society. ( ① ) They have been a source of building timber and firewood, of wild game and foods like mushrooms. ( ② ) During the Middle Ages, especially in parts of Northern Europe, they developed a reputation for being places of darkness and fear, the home of evil spirits and wild beasts. ( ③ ) In Germany you might have been attacked by werewolves or a semi-human Wild Man, a kind of ogre covered with coarse hair who ate children. ( ④ ) Anglo-Saxon folk tales, such as the eighth-century Beowulf, frequently set the action in scary forests, a legacy inherited by the stories of Tolkien, in which friendly hobbits are extremely frightened at the thought of having to pass through the haunted Fangorn Forest. ( ⑤ ) Out of this medieval vision comes our word ‘savage’, derived from silva, meaning a wood.






28.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Fascinated by how easily fish slip through water, scientists and sportswear designers alike have examined fish skins at the molecular level to determine why they have less friction than humans. ① Researchers were surprised to discover that shark skin, which is rough enough to be used as sandpaper when dried, is one of the animal skins with the least friction. ② Shark skin is covered by small, V-shaped bumps, made from the same material as the sharks’ teeth. ③ Shark fin is also incorrectly perceived by some as having high nutritional value, as well as cancer-fighting abilities. ④ The rough surface actually reduces drag as the shark glides through the ocean, because the bumps efficiently channel the water away from the surface. ⑤ Copied in fabric form, a shark skin-like system woven into a textile’s structure gives the fabric a hydrodynamic advantage.
* hydrodynamic: 유체 역학의




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
31. 
Bikes4Hope Support Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?


















　The graph above shows the trend of blood donation in Korea from 2005 to 2009, in terms of the number of blood donors and blood donation rates. ① The blood donation rate was 5.3% in 2009, which was the highest during the given period. ② The blood donation rate was the same both in 2005 and in 2006, and it showed constant increase afterward. ③ The number of group blood donors was the highest in 2005, and the number of individual blood donors was the highest in 2009. ④ The year 2005 was the only year when the number of group blood donors was larger than that of individual blood donors. ⑤ The difference between the number of group donors and that of individual donors was the largest in 2009.


30.주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A) After a few debates that left both of them feeling frustrated, Gabe decided to change strategy, and announced, “Okay, Colin, we’ll try it your way for three days. But if you’re late for school any of those days, then we go back to the old system.”
(B) For example, he protested Gabe’s policy that he get fully dressed before coming down to breakfast. Gabe didn’t particularly care what Colin wore at the breakfast table, but he worried that if Colin didn’t dress first, he’d wind up late for school. “But I’m more comfortable in my pajamas!” Colin argued.
(C) Colin, amazed by the change in response, aced the trial run. He wore his pajamas and stayed punctual. As a result, the new practice stuck, and both sides are happier with the outcome.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



① 아프리카로 자전거를 보내기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
② 3월 27일에 4시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 음악 공연과 마술 공연이 있다.
④ 입장권은 당일 현장에서만 판매한다.
⑤ 어른을 동반한 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.





32.다음 글에 드러난 Hogan의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Hogan had already been walking for hours along the sand track. He had drunk the last remaining drop of water an hour before. His feet came down regularly one in front of the other, sending up little clouds of dust. The dunes stretched as far as the eye could see, motionless, on either side of the track. Nothing was left but the dazzling sand with its millions of tiny broken grains, and dry stones that crumbled away in layers. No trucks passed. No aircraft ever appeared in the immense sky. The nothingness was so great that it could not even be called solitude any longer. It was like floating on the ocean, thousands of miles from land, while tiny waves sweep forward in ripples.
① satisfied and grateful	② relaxed and refreshed
③ hopeless and abandoned	④ excited and anticipating
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[33 ~ 37] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
3.Languages evolve differences because different groups of people independently develop different words and different
pronunciations over the course of time. But the question remains why those diverged languages don’t merge again when formerly separated people spread out and re-contact each other at speech boundaries. For instance, at the modern boundary between Germany and Poland, there are Polish villages near German villages, but the villagers still speak a local variety of either German or of Polish, rather than a mix of German and Polish. Why is that so? Probably the main disadvantage of speaking a mixed language involves a basic function of human language: as soon as you start to speak to someone else, your language serves as an instantly recognizable badge of your 	. It’s much easier for wartime spies to wear the enemy’s uniform than to imitate convincingly the enemy’s language and pronunciation. People who speak your language are your people, whereas someone speaking a different language is apt to be regarded as a potentially dangerous stranger.
① artistic taste
② group identity
③ intellectual power
④ personal character
⑤ educational background






34. Our craving for 	is illustrated by a study of religious Israeli women, carried out by anthropologists  Richard Sosis and W.  Penn Handwerker.
During the 2006 Lebanon War the town of Tzfat and its environs in the Galilee region of northern Israel were hit by dozens of rockets daily. Although siren warnings alerted Tzfat residents to protect their own lives by taking refuge in bomb shelters, they could do nothing to protect their houses. Realistically, that threat from the rockets was unpredictable and uncontrollable. Nevertheless, about two-thirds of the women interviewed by Sosis and Handwerker recited psalms every day to cope with the stress of the rocket attacks. When they were asked why they did so, a common reply was that they felt compelled “to do something” as opposed to doing nothing at all. Although reciting psalms does not actually deflect rockets, it did provide the women with a sense of control as they took action in their own way.	* deflect: 빗나가게 하다
① knowledge of the future
② relief from feeling helpless
③ exploring the unknown world
④ being accepted by our peers
⑤ freedom from social conventions
35. 
Risk	management	professionals	look	in	the	past	for
information on the so-called worst-case scenario and use it to estimate future risks ― this method is called “stress testing.” They take the worst historical recession, the worst war, or the worst point in unemployment as an exact estimate for the worst future outcome. But they never notice the following inconsistency: this so-called worst-case event, when it happened, exceeded the worst case at the time. I have  called  this  mental  defect  the  Lucretius  problem,  after  the Latin poetic philosopher who wrote that the fool believes that the tallest mountain in the world will be equal to the tallest one he has observed. The same can be seen in the Fukushima nuclear reactor, which experienced a huge failure in 2011 when a tsunami struck. It had been built to endure the worst past historical earthquake, with the builders not imagining much worse ? and not thinking that the worst past event had to be a surprise, as it 	. [3점]
① had no precedent
② matched their prediction
③ led to better preparation
④ repeated itself over time
⑤ came earlier than expected








36. Think of how you developed your style of using the brakes on your car. As you were mastering the skill of
taking curves, you gradually learned when to let go of the accelerator and when and how hard to use the brakes. Curves differ, and the variability you experienced while learning ensures that you are now ready to brake at the right time and strength for any curve you encounter. The conditions for learning this skill are ideal, because you receive immediate and unambiguous feedback every time you go around a bend: the mild reward of a comfortable turn or the mild punishment of some difficulty in handling the car if you brake either too hard or not quite hard enough. The situations that face a harbor pilot maneuvering large ships are no less regular, but skill is much more difficult to acquire by sheer experience because of the long delay between actions and their noticeable outcomes. Whether professionals have a chance to develop intuitive expertise depends essentially on 	, as well as on sufficient opportunity to practice. [3점]
① the ability to control emotions
② the assistance from instructors
③ the discovery of hidden talents
④ the desire to beat the opponents
⑤ the quality and speed of feedback




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

37. The tight bonds we form with our tools go both ways.
Even as our technologies become extensions of ourselves, we become extensions of our technologies. When the carpenter takes his hammer into his hand, he can use that hand to do only what a hammer can do. The hand becomes an implement for pounding and pulling nails. When the soldier puts the binoculars to his eyes, he can see only what the lenses allow him to see. His field of view lengthens, but he becomes blind to what’s nearby. Nietzsche’s experience with his typewriter provides a particularly good illustration of the way 	. Not only did the philosopher come to imagine that his typewriter was “a thing like me”; he also sensed that he was becoming a thing like it, that his typewriter was shaping his thoughts. [3점]
① technologies exert their influence on us
② tools are refined and developed
③ we overcome our weaknesses
④ one invention builds on another
⑤ we put our passion into meaningful purposes











[38 ~ 39] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
38. Indeed, confusing people a little bit is beneficial ― it is good for you and good for them. For example, imagine
someone extremely punctual who comes home at exactly six o’clock every day for fifteen years. You can use his arrival to set your watch. The fellow will cause his family anxiety if he is barely a few minutes late. Someone with a slightly more  (A)   schedule, with, say, a half-hour variation, won’t do so. For similar reasons, stability is not good for the economy: firms become very weak during long periods of steady success without failure, and hidden vulnerabilities accumulate silently under the surface ― so delaying crises is not a very good idea. Likewise, (B)   of ‘ups and downs’ in the market causes hidden risks to accumulate quietly. The longer one goes without a market trauma, the worse the damage when a real crisis occurs.
39. 
My suggestion is to understand and make use of the
changes in people’s strengths and weaknesses as they grow older. We can say that useful attributes tending to decrease with age include ambition, desire to compete, physical strength and endurance, and capacity for sustained mental concentration. (A) ,  useful  attributes  tending  to  increase with age include experience of one’s field, understanding of people and relationships, and ability to help other people without one’s own ego getting in the way. These shifts in strengths result in many older workers choosing to devote more of their efforts to supervising, administering, advising, and teaching. (B) , my farmer friends in their 80s spend less time on horseback and on tractors, more time making strategic decisions about the business of farming; my older lawyer friends spend less time in court, more time mentoring younger lawyers.
(A) (B)
① In other words For instance
② In other words Instead
③ Additionally	In contrast
④ Conversely	In contrast
⑤ Conversely	For instance

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

?

* vulnerability: 취약성
(A)	(B)

①
restricted
frequency


②
unpredictable
expectation
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
③
unpredictable
absence
① suspend
prosperity
② suspend
competition
④
⑤
consistent
consistent
duration
experience
③ extend
⑤ stimulate
prosperity
competition
④ extend
threat



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[41 ∼ 43] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


(B)
　The embarrassed boy ran up to (b) his room, slammed the door, and refused to come down to the party. But a little later his mother came up to fetch him. When she brought him downstairs, he saw his grandmother proudly walking around the room with a large bowl filled with a variety of beautiful fruits and, in the middle, the polished football he had brought home. When a guest asked his grandmother to explain what a football was doing in the middle of her fruit bowl, she told (c) him about the gift from her grandson and added, “From a child is beautiful, anything.”

42.밑줄  친  (a)∼(e)  중에서  가리키는  대상이  나머지  넷과  다른
것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

43.위 글의 Allen Sherman에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니가 부르러 온 후에야 파티에 참석했다.
② 과일 그릇 한가운데 놓여 있는 축구공을 보았다.
③ 할머니에게 드릴 축구공을 깨끗이 닦았다.
④ 축구공을 발견한 어머니로부터 칭찬을 들었다.
⑤ 가장 좋은 장난감들을 주고 축구공을 얻었다.

[44 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.


(C)


(D)
　The slamming door reminded the now embarrassed Sherman of a door that he had slammed twenty-five years earlier.  One morning he  had  heard his Yiddish-speaking grandmother announce that she needed a “football” for a large party she would be hosting that evening. Although the young Sherman wondered why his grandmother needed a football, he was determined to obtain one for her. He went around his neighborhood and finally found one boy, a bully who punched (e) him in the nose before agreeing to give over his football in exchange for Sherman’s best toys.
* Yiddish: 독일어ㆍ히브리어 등의 혼성 언어

41.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)



4.위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Focus Your Energy on Seizing an Opportunity
② Turn Your Attention to the Unemployed
③ Work Stress: How You Can Beat It
④ Enduring Uncertainty Is a Sign of Maturity
⑤ Anticipating Disaster Is Worse Than Disaster

45.위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① removed	② renewed
③ visualized	④ introduced
⑤ underestimated





2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지	1



6.  대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I think we should.
② We enjoyed a great party.
③ I  wonder  why  they  cancelled it.
④ Yes,  we  can  attend  the meeting.
⑤ No, I don’t have time for dinner.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. Now I can go on a vacation.
② Of course. I did everything I could do.
③ Thank you. I’ll delete the files right away.
④ I’m sorry. I’ll finish it as soon as possible.
⑤ Don’t apologize. I’m sure you’ll get better soon.


3. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 원예 동아리  가입을 권유하려고
② 티셔츠  수령  방법을 안내하려고
③ 채소 재배 방법을  설명하려고
④ 회장 후보 자격을  공지하려고
⑤ 회비 납부를 요청하려고


4. 대화를  듣고, 두  사람이  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 독서가 글쓰기에 미치는 영향
② 토론 능력 향상을 위한 방법
③ 일기를 쓸 때의 유의 사항
④ 자유 토론 방식의 장점
⑤ 잘못된 상식의 위험성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 소설가 － 독자	② 면접관 － 구직자
③ 사진작가 － 패션모델	④ 잡지 기자 － 영화배우
⑤ 관광 가이드 － 여행객




7. 대화를  듣고, 여자가  남자를  위해  할  일로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 요리책 소개하기	② 조리사 추천하기
③ 요리 수업 신청하기	④ 조리 기구 준비하기
⑤ 요리 웹사이트 알려 주기

8. 대화를  듣고, 남자가  변경된  시간에  배드민턴  연습을  할  수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 댄스 연습을  해야 해서
② 코치를  구할 수 없어서
③ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
④ 학교 행사에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 도서관 아르바이트를 해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $300	② $360	③ $450	④ $500	⑤ $540

10. 대화를  듣고, 학부모  교사  회의에  관해  두  사람이  언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 유인물 복사	② 컴퓨터 설치	③ 간식 구입
④ 강당 청소	⑤ 현수막 걸기

11. summer  camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 수영장 시설을 갖추고 있다.
② 수학과 과학 프로그램을 제공한다.
③ 캠프 기간은 5일이다.
④ 등록비는 무료이다.
⑤ 온라인 신청만 가능하다.




2	


12. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고, 두  사람이  관람할  영화를
고르시오. [3점]
Movie Information

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Okay. I’ll go find another one soon.
② Never mind. I’ll give you my advice.
③ But didn’t you already contact him last year?
④ I’m sure you’ll do a great job at the program.
⑤ Then can you send them to me by text message?
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① I’d like to publish a book.
② I’ll deliver them on schedule.
③ I’d prefer to get them by mail.
④ I’ll be right back and buy them.
⑤ I’ll revise the review right away.
15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Helen이  손님에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Helen:   	
① Don’t worry. I will hold the shirt for you.
② I’m sorry, but we don’t sell products on credit.
③ You can visit the lost and found for your wallet.
④ I apologize. We don’t have anything in your size.
⑤ Let me show you a different type of shirt instead.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to become organized
② the importance of donation
③ factors that affect personality
④ why we should collect things
⑤ problems of throwing things away
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① papers	② clock	③ toys
④ lamp	⑤ flower vase


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?



Dear Ms. Mattie,

Thank you very much for offering me the research engineer position at ABC Company.  However, after  a great deal of thought, I have decided not to accept  the position. Your company has  an excellent  reputation as a research institution and has many  aspects that  are very attractive to me. Unfortunately, I cannot accept your offer because I have decided to pursue another opportunity. Once again, thank you for your consideration.
Very truly yours, Christine Mahoe

① 입사  제안을 거절하려고
② 계약  조건을 확인하려고
③ 업무  조정을 요청하려고
④ 입사 시험 결과를  문의하려고
⑤ 입사 지원 절차를  알아보려고









19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Obviously, one of the judgments the public has of us is whether or not our telephone service is good. Technically, if they get their calls through, efficiently  and  promptly,  they  get what they want. That, however, is not  all  they  want.  They want to have the service rendered to them in a manner that pleases them; they want not only efficiency but courtesy and consideration; and they are in a  position  to  get  what  they want. They are in the driver’s seat; they are paying the bills; and an understanding of that fact is a real and fundamental basis of public relations.  In  order, therefore,  for a great company to satisfactorily serve the public, it  must  have a philosophy and a method of  doing  business  which  will allow and insure that its people serve  the  public efficiently and in a pleasing manner.
① 성공적인 기업 경영을 위해 사원 복지 향상에 힘써야 한다.
② 효율적이면서 고객을 만족시키는 서비스를 제공해야 한다.
③ 기업 이익의 일정 부분을 사회에 환원해야 한다.
④ 공공 예절을 지키며 휴대 전화를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 요구에 맞는 신제품을 개발해야 한다.




	 3


20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　On the path to excellence, some obstacles may  initially  seem overwhelming. Every performer experiences this feeling, even the greatest performers in  the  world.  If  you  believe  that the obstacles are too great to overcome, you will prove yourself right even when you are wrong. Most seemingly impossible obstacles can be overcome by seeing possibilities, focusing on what is within  your  control,  taking  the  first  step, and then focusing on the next step  and  the  next step after that. If your commitment becomes  weak,  remember  your dream and why it  is  important  to  you,  find  simple  joys in your daily pursuits, rejoice in the little  victories or small steps forward, and embrace the process of ongoing learning. With a positive perspective and  persistence,  you  will get through and find a way through all obstacles.
① 시작이 좋아야 큰 성공을 거둘 수 있다.
② 꿈을 이루기 위해 현실적인 목표를 세워야 한다.
③ 긍정적 시각과 끈기가 있으면 난관을 극복할 수 있다.
④ 갈등을 유발하지 않으려면 감정의 조절이 필요하다.
⑤ 지속적인 학습을 위해서는 동기부여가 필요하다.








21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　For many years now, mediated entertainment such as TV  and film has been able to stimulate our optical and auditory senses with sights and sounds. Some forms of new media, however, even engage our senses of touch and  smell.  The view the wearer of some special device sees is  projected  on the screen behind him. Wearers become immersed in the computerized scene and use  the  gloves  to  pick  up  and  move simulated objects. Many virtual  reality  games  and  rides now allow audiences and players to feel sensations of motion and touch. New media may  also  include  aromas,  such as Disney’s “Soaring Over California” attraction at the California Adventure theme park, where audiences smell orange orchards and pine forests while enjoying a simulated hang-gliding experience across the countryside. Makers of emerging forms of entertainment will likely continue to experiment with ways they can simulate and manipulate  reality by stimulating our senses.
① TV and Film: Blessing or Curse?
② How We Operate an Audio System
③ Seeing Is More Important Than Touching
④ “Soaring Over California,” a Theme Park Adventure
⑤ New Mediated Entertainment: Stimulate More Senses!
22. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Recently, researchers have suggested that the purpose of laughter is not just to communicate that one is in a playful state, but to actually induce this state in others as well. According to this view, the peculiar sounds of laughter have    a direct effect on the listener, inducing positive emotional arousal that mirrors the emotional state  of  the  laugher, perhaps by activating certain specialized brain circuits. In this way, laughter may serve an important biosocial function of coupling together the positive emotions of members of  a  group and thereby coordinating their activities. This would explain why laughter is so infectious; when we hear someone laughing, it is almost impossible not to feel  cheerful  and  begin laughing too.
① effects of laughter on others
② benefits of activating brain circuits
③ strategies for coordinating activities
④ negative aspects of emotional reactions
⑤ importance of grouping in communication



23. NAS Bird Watching Adventure에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


nAS  Bird  Watching  Adventure
NAS National Wildlife Refuge, Houston Sunday, July 20, 2014, 8:00 － 18:00
$80  per person

　The tour starts  at the NAS Forest & Trail Headquarters at 8:00 am. Once we arrive at the refuge at about 10:00 am, we will begin our  six-hour hike, searching for birds and learning about the plants and animals of the refuge.
?What  to  expect:  The  hike  covers  3  to  4  miles and includes moderately difficult terrain.
?What’s   provided:  Transportation,	lunch,   and expert guides.
?What  to  bring:  Comfortable  shoes,  long  pants, and sunblock.
For more information, visit www.wls.gov/nasforest.

① NAS  Forest  &  Trail  Headquarters에서 오전 8시에 시작된다.
② 야생 생물 보호 구역의 동식물에 관해서 배울 수 있다.
③ 도보 여행의 거리는 3～4  마일이다.
④ 교통편은 제공하지만 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
⑤ 편한 신발, 긴 바지, 자외선 차단제를 가져와야 한다.




4	


24. Swan Lake에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

SWAN LAKE
July 3 (Thu.) - 4 (Fri.), 2014, at the State Theater

Time:	Thu. 8:00 pm / Fri. 7:00 pm Prices: A Seats - $120 / B Seats - $90 Running Time: 2 hours
Minimum Age: Children under 7 will not be admitted.

The ballet is performed to  the  live  music  of  the  State Theater Orchestra.
?20%  Early  Purchase  Discount  until  May  31
- To receive this discount, you must purchase your tickets from our website at www.statetheater.com.
?Phone  Reservations:  887-885-7909
- Business hours: 09:00 － 18:00 (7 days a week)
?Cancellation  Policy
- On the day of performance: No refund
- 1～5 days before the performance: 30% cancellation fee


① 공연 시간은 세 시간 동안이다.
② 녹음된 음악에 맞춰 발레가 공연된다.
③ 웹사이트에서 5월 31일까지 티켓을 구매하면 할인 혜택이 있다.
④ 전화 예매는 평일에만 가능하다.
⑤ 공연 당일에 취소해도 환불받을 수 있다.


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?










　The above graph shows the percentage of U.S. advertising spending by media and consumer time spent using each  type  of media in 2011. ① In the case of TV, both advertising spending and consumer time spent took up the largest proportion with 43% and 40%, respectively. ② Print ranked second in advertising  spending,  whereas  it  ranked  last in consumer time spent. ③ Web accounted for the third largest proportion in both  advertising  spending  and  consumer time spent. ④ As for the percentage gap between advertising spending and  consumer  time  spent,  Radio showed the smallest gap. ⑤ The percentage gap between advertising spending and consumer time spent was larger in Web than in Mobile.
26. 
Tammy Rahr에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　During  her childhood years, the artist Tammy  Rahr spent    a lot of time outdoors making things from flowers and dirt. Then Tammy and her family moved from the woodlands of New York State to an urban city outside of Los Angeles, California. The experience made her more aware of what was going on in the world. After returning to  New  York  State with her family, Tammy faced another  lesson  in growing up.  A gifted student, she was sent to college when she was just
14. Tammy was able to earn her high school diploma  and some college credit before trying her hand at a number of different jobs. Eventually, she moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico, and studied at the Institute of American Indian Arts. After graduating from the institute, she remained active with it and  the museum there.
① 어린 시절에 꽃과 흙으로 무언가를 만들면서 많은 시간을 보냈다.
② New  York  주에서 California로 이사했다.
③ 가족과 함께 New  York  주로 되돌아갔다.
④ 고등학교 졸업장을 받지 못했다.
⑤ Institute  of  American  Indian  Arts에서 공부했다.















27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In the twentieth century, advances in technology, from refrigeration   to   sophisticated   ovens  to   air transportation
① that  carries  fresh  ingredients  around  the world, contributed
immeasurably to baking and pastry making.  At the  beginning of the twenty-first century, the popularity of fine breads and pastries ② are growing even faster than new chefs can be trained. Interestingly enough, many  of  the technological  advances in bread making have sparked a reaction among bakers and consumers ③ alike. They are looking to reclaim some of the flavors of old-fashioned breads that ④ were lost as baking became more industrialized and baked goods became more refined, standardized, and ― some would say ― flavorless. Bakers are researching methods for ⑤ producing the handmade sourdough breads of the past, and they  are  experimenting  with specialty flours in their search for flavor.




	 5


28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
　Although children watch television at various times, the programming that they view alone tends to be specifically aimed at children. In the United States particularly,  most  of the advertising during this segment consists of ads for food, particularly sugared food. During the run-up to Christmas,
(A) increasing / decreasing numbers of ads concern toys and games. Such practices  are  believed  to put pressure  on parents to yield to what the media  have  dubbed  “pester  power.”  This has led to calls for legislation to (B) promote / regulate advertising in Europe and the United States. Indeed, the Swedish government has outlawed television advertising of products aimed at children under 12, and recently in  the  United States, 50 psychologists (C) rejected / signed a petition calling for a ban on the advertising of children’s goods.
* pester  power:  부모에게  떼를  써서 물건을 구매하게  하는 힘
** petition:  탄원(서)

[30～32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. The true champion recognizes that excellence often flows most smoothly from 	, a  fact  that can  get lost   in
these high-tech days. I used to train  with  a  world-class  runner who was constantly hooking himself up to  pulse  meters and pace keepers. He spent hours collecting data that  he thought would help him improve. In fact, a good  25  percent of his athletic time was devoted  to  externals  other than working out. Sports became so complex for him that he forgot how to enjoy himself. Contrast his approach with that   of the late Abebe Bikila, the Ethiopian who won the 1960 Olympic Marathon running barefoot. High-tech clothing and digital watches were not part of his world. Abebe Bikila  simply ran. Many times in running, and  in  other  areas  of  life, less is more. [3점]
① talent	② patience	③ simplicity
④ generosity	⑤ confidence

(A) (B)	(C)
① increasing …… promote …… rejected
② increasing   …… regulate	…… signed
③ increasing   …… regulate	…… rejected
④ decreasing   …… promote   …… signed
⑤ decreasing  …… regulate	…… signed















29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Dave Butcher, director of training  for  Sea  World  in Florida, showed me more than I’d imagined possible. His sea lions worked for social rewards  as well as  fish.  Consequently, he did not have to keep his sea lions hungry in order to make
① them  perform.  During  and  after  the  day’s performances,
the sea lions could have all the fish ② they wanted. One result was that ③ they were not irritable, as any hungry animal might be. The sea lions were friendly to those humans they knew and enjoyed being with ④ them. I was surprised to see trainers on their lunch hour  sunbathing in  a pile  with their  sea lions. Another result of stopping  food  deprivation  was that these sea lions grew and grew! In fact, ⑤ they became bigger than most trained sea lions in the past, which weren’t given enough food.
31. 
The origins of contemporary Western thought can be
traced back to the golden age of ancient Greece, when Greek thinkers laid the foundations for modern Western politics, philosophy, science, and law. Their novel approach was to pursue rational inquiry through adversarial discussion: The  best way  to  evaluate  one  set  of  ideas,  they  decided,  was by 	. In the political sphere, the result was democracy,  in  which supporters of rival policies vied for rhetorical supremacy; in philosophy, it led to reasoned arguments and dialogues  about the nature of the world; in science, it prompted the  construction of competing theories to try to explain natural phenomena; in the field of law, the result was the adversarial legal system. This approach is the foundation for the modern Western way of life, in which politics, commerce, science, and  law are all rooted in orderly competition. [3점]
* adversarial: 대립 관계의
** vie:  다투다,  경쟁하다
① forcing it upon the opponents
② pursuing a conventional standard
③ testing it against another set of ideas
④ promoting a consensus among supporters
⑤ rejecting competing theories without discussion




6	


32. I would like to compare the shift from analog to
digital  film-making  to  the  shift  from  fresco  and  tempera  to oil  painting  in  the  early  Renaissance.  A  painter  making a fresco has  limited  time  before  the  paint  dries,  and  once  it has dried, no further changes to the image are possible. Similarly, a traditional filmmaker has limited means of modifying images once they are recorded on film.  Medieval tempera painting can be compared to the practice of special effects during  the  analog  period  of cinema.  A  painter  working  with  tempera  could   modify and rework  the  image,  but  the  process  was  painstaking  and slow. The switch to oils greatly liberated painters by allowing them to quickly  create  much  larger  compositions  as well as to modify them as long as necessary. Similarly,
 	, digital technology  redefines  what  can  be  done  with  cinema. [3점]
① by equating oil painting with analog film-making
② by allowing  a  filmmaker  to  treat  a  film  image  as  an  oil painting
③ with  the  shift  from  oil  painting  styles  to  fresco  ones  in making films
④ by	integrating	fresco	painting	techniques	into	the film-making process
⑤ with the introduction of tempera painting methods to cinematic special effects

33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? When there is a discrepancy between  the verbal message and the nonverbal message, the  latter  typically weighs more in  forming a judgment. 		(A)			, a friend might react to a plan for dinner with a comment like “that’s good,” but with little vocal enthusiasm  and  a  muted  facial  expression. In spite of the verbal comment, the lack of expressive enthusiasm	suggests		that	the		plan	isn’t	viewed	very positively. In such a case, the purpose of  the  positive comment might be to avoid a disagreement and support the friend, but the lack of a positive expression unintentionally leaks a more candid, negative  reaction  to  the plan.  Of course, the muted expressive display might also be strategic and	intentional. 	(B)	,		the	nonverbal		message	is deliberate, but designed to let the partner know one’s candid reaction indirectly. It is then the partner’s responsibility to interpret the nonverbal message and make some adjustment
in the plan.

(A) (B)
① In  addition	…… Instead
② In  addition	…… However
③ In  contrast	…… That is
④ For example …… However
⑤ For example …… That is
34. 
다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Early one night in  1973  in  my  old  and  cheap  apartment in Bangor, Maine, I got a phone call from my  agent,  Bill,  who was helping me publish my  first  novel.  “Are  you  sitting down?” Bill asked. “No,” I said. “Do  I  need  to?”  “You might,” he said.  “The  publication  rights  for  your  book were sold for four hundred thousand dollars!” I was completely speechless. That amount of money  was  beyond my wildest expectations. I was sure  I  hadn’t  heard  him  right. I couldn’t have. I asked, “Did  you  say  it  went  for  forty thousand dollars?” Bill said it again as clearly as he could, “Four hundred thousand dollars. Congratulations, Steve.” “Are you sure, Bill?” I said in disbelief. He said he was. We talked for another half an hour, but  I  don’t  remember a single word of what we said.
① angry	② jealous
③ astonished	④ sympathetic
⑤ disappointed

[35～36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
35. Music can convey the scope of a film, effectively communicating whether the motion picture is  an epic drama  or a story that exists on a more personal scale. Music can convey the quality and size of a space. ① For example, in Alien  and  Olivier’s  Hamlet,  the  music  serves  at times  to make
small and/or artificial spaces seem more  grand  and  to enhance the sense of realism. ② In addition, music can establish a narrative’s placement in time. ③ Music for motion pictures often serves to authenticate the era or to provide a sense of nostalgia. ④ Music has traditionally been classified by musical instruments. ⑤ Examples of the former would include Amadeus and Immortal Beloved, while a sense of nostalgia is communicated through the music selected  for films such as American Graffiti and The Big Chill.

36. It is difficult to appreciate what a temperature of 20,000,000℃ means.  ① If  the  solar  surface,  not  the center,
were as hot  as this, the  radiation emitted into space would    be so great that the whole Earth would be vaporized within      a few minutes. ② Indeed, this is just what would happen if some cosmic giant were to peel off the outer  layers  of  the Sun like skinning an orange, for the tremendously hot inner regions would then be exposed. ③ It is believed that the brightness  of  the  Sun  can  be  predicted  theoretically.
④ Fortunately, no such circumstance is possible, and  the outer layers of the Sun provide  a sort of blanket  that  protects  us from its inner fires. ⑤ Yet in spite of these blanketing layers, some energy must leak  through  from the Sun’s center to its outer regions, and this leakage is of just  the  right  amount to compensate for the radiation  emitted  by  the surface into surrounding space.




	 7


[37～38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. 

(A) Then I can play the film backward and watch the cat fly down to the floor and see all the  splashes  of  ice  cream  slurp themselves back into the dish. I made Simon jump  in and out several times before I watched the rest of the film.
(B) He said I could do  everything  myself  that  night.  So  I set up the screen at one end of the  living  room.  I turned  on the projector, turned off the light, put the bowl of popcorn in my lap, and settled in to watch the  film  labeled HATTIE-1951.
(C) It’s one of my favorites because my third birthday party   is on it and I can watch our old cat  Simon  jump  up on the dining room table and land in a dish of ice cream.
* slurp: 후루룩 소리를 내다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



38. 
39. 
글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?

　Parents often believe that they are providing help to their children when they constantly correct and criticize them, assuming that they will grow from these remarks. But ask yourself: Do you like being corrected? Do  you grow when  you are constantly criticized? ( ① )  In  truth,  we  tend  to  stay the same when we are criticized. ( ② ) We want  to defend what we have done, and our innate stubbornness  refuses to permit us to accept the criticism we are receiving.     ( ③ ) Behind virtually all criticism is the sentence “If only  you were more like me, and living life  as  I  see  it,  you  would be a lot better off.” ( ④ ) Praise your children for attempting a task, even if it was  unsuccessful,  and  for  taking risks. ( ⑤ ) Create an environment in which your children know that you are with them in their efforts, rather than looking to criticize them.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





(A) In addition to that benefit, helping lower-ability students often pulls higher-ability students to a more sophisticated understanding of the material. The clich? that teachers learn as much as their pupils is certainly true.
(B) Not quite. Knowledge, happily, is not a zero-sum product. Higher-ability students can reinforce their own knowledge  by teaching those with lower ability.
(C) Specifically, the technique of having students help one another raises the question of whether students with lower ability are being helped at the expense of  those  with higher ability. Is this true?
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)






?



(A) (B)
① associate …… genetic
② associate …… environmental
③ identify	…… psychological
④ replace	…… psychological
⑤ replace	…… environmental





8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 




(C) 
　I was born  into  a large poor family in Chicago. As a kid, I had visions of being a hero ― a police officer or an astronaut. However, people would always tell me,  “You  can’t do that. You aren’t smart enough. You aren’t strong enough.” Moreover, (d) I didn’t  do well in school,  and I had  no hope of getting into any college. After  high  school,  I gave up on my dream of going to college  and  got  a  part-time job instead. I felt like I was living in a box labeled “This is where you belong.”
(D) 









41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Give Simpler Answers!
② How  Can  We  Ask  Questions  Properly?
③ Scientific  Facts:  What  the  Asker Needs
④ Accurate Answers: A Mirror of Knowledge
⑤ Why Is Giving Direct Answers Problematic?

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① efficiency	② diversity	③ fluency
④ privacy	⑤ honesty



[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　It was my last football game as a college player. I  made  the final  tackle  and  we  won.  As  people  chanted  my name, (a) I was carried off the  field  on  the  shoulders  of  my teammates. Although I wasn’t  a  great  student  or  a  great football player, I ended up not only graduating from   my dream university but becoming a hero of the  team.  People keep asking me how I did it. Here is my story.






43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 주인공에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 풋볼 선수였다.
② 육군에 입대했다.
③ Chicago에서 태어났다.
④ 고등학교 졸업 직후 대학에 진학했다.
⑤ 입학하고 싶어하는 대학의 교수를 찾아갔다.



2017학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll work on the music, too.
② Okay. That’s a nice title for the video.
③ Fantastic. You did a great presentation.
④ I’m so sorry. I forgot to open the files.
⑤ No problem. I’ll watch them without subtitles.



2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I miss him, too. He’s my favorite teacher.
② When should we visit him in the hospital?
③ Don’t worry. Doctors say that he’s all right.
④ Why don’t we write a card and give it to him?
⑤ I’m afraid he’s not well enough to teach again.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 새로 출시된 음악 교육용 앱을 홍보하려고
② 음악 프로젝트의 결과물 제출 방법을 설명하려고
③ 컴퓨터 프로그램을 활용한 음악 수업을 소개하려고
④ 자기 주도 학습을 위한 스마트폰 활용을 권장하려고
⑤ 프로젝트용 태블릿 컴퓨터 사용 시 주의 사항을 안내하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 환기를 위해 겨울에도 교실 창문을 자주 열어야 한다.
② 학교 난방 온도를 조절하여 전기 요금을 절약해야 한다.
③ 학급 회의를 통해 교실 환경 개선 방안을 논의해야 한다.
④ 교실 공기의 질 개선을 위해 공기 청정기를 설치해야 한다.
⑤ 실내 미세 먼지 농도를 낮추기 위해 청소를 자주 해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 심리 상담사 - 상담 의뢰인
② 애완견 조련사 - 애완견 주인
③ 동물 보호소 직원 - 동물 입양 희망자
④ 산부인과 의사 - 신생아 아버지
⑤ 수의사 - 애견 카페 주인



7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 일식 장면 촬영하기
② 일식 시작 시간 알아보기
③ 일식 관측용 안경 주문하기
④ 비디오카메라 빌려오기
⑤ 일기 예보 확인하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 긴소매 셔츠를 입은 이유를 고르시오.
① 감기가 낫지 않아서
② 긁힌 상처를 보호하려고
③ 햇빛 알레르기가 있어서
④ 장시간 자전거를 타야 해서
⑤ 도서관의 실내 온도가 낮아서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $32	② $34	③ $36	④ $38	⑤ $40

10.대화를 듣고, Student Exchange Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 숙박 장소	② 활동 내용
③ 활동 기간	④ 참가 인원
⑤ 지원 방법

1.The 7th Kids’ Day in the Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일 치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 오후 1시부터 오후 5시까지 진행된다.
② 가장행렬과 함께 시작된다.
③ Rose Garden에서 춤과 공연을 즐길 수 있다.
④ 최신 장난감이 보물찾기의 상품으로 주어진다.
⑤ 기부금은 어린이 도서관 건립에 쓰인다.



2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  남자가  선택한  스노클링  세트
를 고르시오.

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Snorkeling Sets

①
②
③
④
⑤


13.대화를  듣고,  남자의  마지막  말에  대한  여자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry. The campaign is already over.
② Sure. More eyes will find more good spots.
③ All right. I’ll think about joining the campaign.
④ Never mind. I’d better go and finish my project.
⑤ I agree. Angles are important when taking selfies.

14.대화를  듣고,  여자의  마지막  말에  대한  남자의  응답으로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① That’s why I don’t let her eat cookies.
② You should’ve checked the tips in the article.
③ You need to calm down first and tell me why.
④ I’m sorry. I promise that I won’t tell a lie again.
⑤ I got it. I’ll keep that in mind next time she tells a lie.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Kate가  Troy에게  할  말로  가장  적절  한 것을 고르시오.
Kate:  	
① I think you should take the bus instead of a taxi.
② I’ll give you a ride to your office for today.
③ Let’s just hope the subway will move again.
④ The subway would be faster than the car.
⑤ You can use this new app to call a taxi.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① eating tips for increasing productivity
② ways to avoid eating unhealthy snacks
③ importance of having breakfast regularly
④ late night eating habits that lead to obesity
⑤ relationships between diet and mood change

17.언급된 식품이 아닌 것은?
① yogurt	② cereal	③ cheese	④ bananas ⑤ nuts







① 웹 사이트의 개인 정보 유출에 따른 대처법을 안내하려고
② 보안 강화를 위한 웹 사이트 임시 폐쇄를 공지하려고
③ 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 업그레이드를 권고하려고
④ 웹 사이트 회원의 주소 업데이트를 요청하려고
⑤ 네트워크 보안 서비스 업체를 홍보하려고

19.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One time, my boss and I were sitting around the table and I pitched an idea about the trend of screenplays being published and sold as literature. My boss approved it. It was the first time she had given me the go­ahead to report and write a feature. It meant a lot to me that I’d possibly have my name on a longer piece. I felt so happy that I set about the work immediately. I wrote a draft, which was of course open to making revisions. My boss reviewed it and just said, “No, this isn’t working.” She didn’t say why or offer advice about how to fix it. I knew that the first draft wouldn’t be perfect; still, I wasn’t prepared for such an instant rejection. It was almost as if she drained my energy and enthusiasm.
① excited → disappointed	② irritated → sympathetic
③ depressed → pleased	④ frustrated → grateful
⑤ relaxed → jealous

20.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Suppose a child throws a ball to another child intending to start a game of catch. The other child is not watching and the ball hits the child on the head. The child cries and runs to tell the teacher about the aggressive behaviour of the other ‘naughty’ child. Of course the child who threw the ball is innocent but, if we have defined aggression in terms of pure behaviour, the consequences of an act, then the child who throws the ball is unfairly guilty. Clearly we need to take intention into account when we define aggression. We can now move to a more complete definition if we say that aggression is any behaviour that is intended to hurt others.
① 행동의 공격성을 판단할 때는 의도를 헤아려야 한다.
② 다툼이 발생하면 제삼자가 공정하게 중재해야 한다.
③ 잘못된 행동의 결과에 대한 책임을 져야 한다.
④ 운동할 때 안전을 최우선으로 고려해야 한다.
⑤ 어린이에게 협동의 중요성을 가르쳐야 한다.



영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A new development may take years to evolve. If people are only informed of a new proposal in its final stages, their role is often limited to the negative one of rejecting it. Their protests are then seen by planners and developers as an expensive nuisance, so the public become the ‘enemy’. Many people would like their voices to be heard from the initial stages of a proposed new development, instead of at the last stages of an application. Some architects and developers see this as a threat and insult to their professional skills, rather than a two­way process, beneficial to all parties. Of course the public cannot design a building, but its involvement at an early stage adds to the information available, and replaces a confrontational ‘them and us’ situation by a democratic process of participation and consultation. This situation is now changing as the importance of public consultation becomes increasingly recognised.
* nuisance: 골칫거리
① 주민 편의 시설의 설치를 위한 예산 확보가 시급하다.
② 건축물 개발의 초기 단계부터 대중의 참여가 필요하다.
③ 친환경 자재를 활용하는 것이 건축비 절감에 효과적이다.
④ 개발 과정에서 지역 주민 간 갈등이 심화하는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 거주자의 개별적 요구를 수용하는 건축 설계가 증가하고 있다.


2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Birds, as a whole group, are more sensitive to changes in their environment than other animals, so when they start falling off perches we should all be troubled. They are in the forward­most trench of nature’s resistance against the relentless attrition of environmental degradation. Our birds are nature’s early warning system and the scientists are telling us that if we don’t start acting on their distress signals, it won’t be long before the rest of the animal world is overrun as well. The populations of many species are declining rapidly because habitats are being destroyed or undermined, food sources are disappearing and, tricked by the increasingly weird and unstable weather, the birds’ migration and breeding patterns are changing. In short, birds are confused and under stress. Just because you can hear your robins, goldfinches, and sparrows chirping away happily in the garden every morning, don’t be fooled into thinking that all is well in ‘birdworld’.
* attrition: 소모
① controversies over how to preserve birds’ habitats
② changes in bird behavior due to the climate change
③ competition among bird species over limited food sources
④ necessity of paying close attention to the declining bird population
⑤ relationships	between	birds’	migration	and	breeding patterns

23.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Appealing though it might be to offload the responsibility for teaching our students basic knowledge to their elementary school teachers or to the Internet, the research of cognitive psychologists who study learning and the basic study habits of most students suggest that we cannot do this. One of our first and most important tasks as teachers is to help students develop a rich body of knowledge in our content areas ? without doing so, we handicap considerably their ability to engage in cognitive activities like thinking and evaluating and creating. As cognitive psychologist Daniel Willingham argued, you can’t think creatively about information unless you have information in your head to think about. “Research from cognitive science has shown,” he explained, “that the sorts of skills that teachers want for their students ? such as the ability to analyze and think critically ? require extensive factual knowledge.” We have to know things, in other words, to think critically about them.
① Critical Thinking: A Must for Creativity
② Factual Knowledge Is No Longer Required
③ Does Learning Happen Only in the Classroom?
④ Knowledge: A Cornerstone for Cognitive Activities
⑤ Physical Activities Enhance Cognitive Development



24.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The above graph shows what type of content a sample of 1,091 online consumers from 11 countries in 2016 tended to read or watch thoroughly, and what they tended to skim.
① The percentage of people who consumed videos thoroughly was the highest, followed by social media posts.
② Less than thirty percent of the respondents answered they read or watched blogs and podcasts thoroughly, respectively. ③ Blogs, social media posts, and news articles were top three contents which were most likely to be skimmed by online consumers. ④ Videos showed the largest percentage point gap between “Consume thoroughly” and “Skim,” whereas research content showed the smallest.
⑤ The percentage of respondents who consumed news articles thoroughly was more than twice that of respondents who consumed podcasts thoroughly.




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

28. Nicolas Appert에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Nicolas Appert was born in Ch?lons­sur­Marne, on the edge of France’s Champagne region, in 1749. He became an accomplished chef and served in the kitchens of various noblemen before setting up as a confectioner in Paris in 1781. In this line of work he was necessarily aware of the  use of sugar to preserve fruit, and he wondered whether it could be used to preserve other foods. As his interest in food preservation grew he began to experiment with storing food in sealed champagne bottles. In 1795 he moved to the village of Ivry­sur­Seine, where he began to offer preserved foods for sale, and in 1804 he set up a small factory to produce them. By this time some of his preserved food had been tested by the French navy, which was impressed by its quality. Appert had devised his methods solely  by experiment and had no idea why it worked.
* confectioner: 제과업자
① 뛰어난 요리사로 여러 귀족의 주방에서 일했다.
② 과일 보존에 설탕을 사용하는 것을 알았다.
③ 식품을 샴페인 병에 밀봉하여 저장하는 실험을 했다.
④ 1804년에 보존 식품 생산을 위한 작은 공장을 세웠다.
⑤ 식품 보존의 원리를 이해한 후 실험을 통해 확인했다.

29. Greenwoods Business Start­up Academy에 관한 다음 안내 문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 1주일 동안 창업에 관해 배운다.
② 9학년에서 12학년까지의 고등학생이 참가한다.
③ 숙박비는 참가비와 별도로 지불해야 한다.
④ 사업 계획 경진 대회가 마지막 날 열린다.
⑤ 참가 인원이 100명으로 제한되어 있다.
30. 
Root Garden Club에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 모든 연령의 아이들이 참여할 수 있다.
② 매달 두 번째 토요일에 수업이 진행된다.
③ 물을 주기 위해 텃밭을 매주 방문해야 한다.
④ 요리 수업과 원예 수업이 교대로 진행된다.
⑤ 요리 수업에 필요한 물품과 재료는 모두 제공된다.





28.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린 것은?
　People seeking legal advice should be assured, when discussing their rights or obligations with a lawyer, ① which the latter will not disclose to third parties the information provided. Only if this duty of confidentiality is respected
② will people feel free to consult lawyers and provide the information required for the lawyer to prepare the client’s defense. Regardless of the type of information ③ disclosed, clients must be certain that it will not be used against them in a court of law, by the authorities or by any other party. It is generally considered to be a condition of the good functioning of the legal system and, thus, in the general interest. Legal professional privilege is ④ much more than an ordinary rule of evidence, limited in its application to the facts of a particular case. It is a fundamental condition on which the administration of justice as a whole ⑤ rests.
* confidentiality: 비밀 유지




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.(A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은? [3점]
　In literature as distinct from journalism, the ablest writers will never assume that the bare bones of a story can be
(A) enough / insufficient to win over their audience. They will not suppose that an attack or a flood or a theft must in and of itself carry some intrinsic degree of interest which will cause the reader to be appropriately moved or outraged. These writers know that no event, however shocking, can ever guarantee (B) detachment / involvement ; for this latter prize, they must work harder, practicing their distinctive craft, which means paying attention to language and keeping a tight rein on pace and structure. In certain situations, creative writers may even choose to (C) emphasize / sacrifice strict accuracy, and rather than feel that they are thereby carrying out a criminal act, they will instead understand that falsifications may occasionally need to be committed in the service of a goal higher still than accuracy.
(A) (B)	(C)

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. One characteristic of people who have achieved peace of mind is their independence. They trust their instincts. Nobody can tell them what to think if their inner voices say otherwise. Brendan O’Regan tells about a doctoral student who placed an ad in an Idaho newspaper asking if anyone within a 300­mile radius had experienced a remission. Twenty­five people replied. She noticed that many of them were farmer’s wives who had in common a strong faith in
 	. When she asked one of her interview subjects how she had felt when the doctor told her she had a terminal illness, the woman simply said, “I figured that was his opinion. We’re used to being told all these things by all these experts from the federal government who come in and look at the soil. They say ‘Don’t plant corn over there because it won’t grow,’ and you plant it and it grows beautifully. So you realize the experts don’t know everything. When the doctor told me I was going to die in six months, I said ‘What does he know, he’s only an expert!’”

* remission: (병의) 회복
① their own judgment	② their land and home
③ medical development	④ social security system
⑤ agricultural technology











30.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　A middle­aged man once asked a young mindfulness teacher for meditation instructions in plain language. He suggested that ① the man carve out five or ten minutes every day to sit comfortably or lie down and focus on his breathing. When thoughts came to mind, the young teacher told him to ignore them and go back to focusing on his breath. Although the middle­aged man remembered the instructions of ② his teacher, he couldn’t follow them. When his mind got busy, he was sucked into a mental loop of analyzing his problems. When ③ he wasn’t thinking, he’d get bored and zone out. Either way, ④ this hopeful new meditator didn’t feel that his time was well spent. When he was thinking and meditating, he figured he’d be better off sitting at his desk, and when he zoned out while meditating,
⑤ he figured he’d be better off daydreaming on a long chair in the backyard.
34. 
So closely is sniffing tied to odor perception that people routinely sniff when they are asked to imagine a smell. Without prompting, they take larger sniffs when imagining pleasant odors and smaller ones when imagining malodors. During visual imagery the eyes explore an imagined scene using the same scan paths made when viewing the actual visual scene. Preventing eye movements during visual imagery ? by having people stare at a stationary target ? reduces the quality of the image. Smell researcher Noam Sobel found that, similarly, imagined odors were more vivid when people could sniff than when they were wearing nose clips and unable to sniff. Actually sniffing increased the unpleasantness of an imagined bad smell (urine) and increased the pleasantness of a good one (flowers). Sniffing at an imaginary odor isn’t an absent­minded habit ? it’s a behavior that 	. [3점]
* malodor: 고약한 냄새
① enhances our mobility when we are in danger
② mixes various senses into an integrated image
③ compensates for the visual deficiency in the dark
④ improves the mental image we are trying to create
⑤ helps us relate ourselves with a particular natural object



6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3.People change over time, often for the better. Maturity,
wisdom, patience, and many other strengths can result from the gradual accumulation of life experiences. But do these qualities have to develop slowly? Researcher Timothy Carey and colleagues recently examined the idea that
 	. They conducted structured interviews with people who had just finished psychotherapy. Reports of aha moments abounded. One interviewee said that he could “visualize the point” at which he changed; another said, “I could actually hear it.” Many of them could identify the moment at which they had their realizations, such as in a swimming pool with a spouse or in a particular meeting with a therapist. Some used familiar metaphors to describe their ahas, such as a light being turned on, a button being pressed, a click, or a “‘ping’ and then it was like I could see things clearly.” Personal growth doesn’t have to be a glacial process. As physician­author Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., wrote, “A moment’s insight is sometimes worth a life’s experience.” [3점]
① human attention span is surprisingly short
② one’s strengths and weaknesses are not fixed
③ insights can be shortcuts to positive personal change
④ life experiences become more meaningful when shared
⑤ a single standard cannot measure one’s physical growth



35. Renewal and reform always depend on a capacity for going backwards to go forward. Key to this process is a search within one’s own mind for a model according to which reformed practice can be organized. Architects have long appealed to a primitive hut as just such a model. It is a structure thought to provide access as close to the first principles of architecture as it is possible to get, yet traces of this structure exist nowhere other than in the mind’s eye of the architect searching for it. Nonetheless, absence of the primitive hut from physical reality does little to diminish its importance for the renewal of present practices. If a desired (or required) thing resides in paradise, and no current map indicates its location, getting to it will only be possible via dreams and wishes. Reconstructions of it will necessarily be interpretations based on 	. Even though it is impossible to get there, returning to paradise nonetheless remains a reasonable destination for the memory, still able, by way of example, to fulfill its promise to the here and now. [3점]
① regularities within physical reality beyond the origin
② distortions due to the ignorance of evaluation models
③ varieties of geographical locations of modern structures
④ potentials that arise from the daring cutoff from the past practices
⑤ resemblances modeled after a non­existent object forever beyond our reach

35.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Large satellites for collecting solar power and transmitting it to the Earth have been the subject of much study. Their potential is vast indeed. ① The energy from the Sun that reaches the Earth over the course of just three days is equal to the energy in the fossil fuels needed to keep the human race supplied with power for 100 years at the present rate of consumption. ② Many engineering problems of transmitting the power back to the Earth remain unsolved, and it remains unclear if and when solar power will become commercially competitive. ③ A satellite of just 155 miles (250 km) in diameter could supply all of our present energy needs, assuming 10% overall efficiency, with a very low carbon footprint. ④ Solar panels in orbit are always in sunlight, they can always point directly at the Sun, and the radiation from the Sun is not reduced by atmospheric absorption. ⑤ As a result, the energy intake for cells in orbit is on average about ten times greater than that of terrestrial ones.

[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.

(A) To this extent, it can be claimed that most cultures, if not all of them, have both communal music­making where everyone participates and where the notion of musical talent is irrelevant, and special ritual and ceremonial music where only the specially talented and trained perform, and where the rest listen and participate as observers.
(B) In addition to such events, there was also communal music­making, especially at festivals such as the Winter Solstice, Harvest time, Spring time, and other secular celebrations where everyone participated. Music in the Christian church is similarly organised with communally sung hymns, anthems, and other liturgical items sung by the specially trained choir.
(C) That is, specially trained musicians performed and the audience was expected to contemplate the musical aesthetic as they listened. It is from this tradition that the instrumental and vocal forms of modern western music have evolved. [3점]
* secular: 세속적인 ** liturgical: 예배용의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(E) That’s because objects always have a positive amount of mass. There is no such thing as negative mass. It’s not like electric charge that comes in both positive and negative values.
(F) That’s why a brick is heavier than a balloon, heavier and harder to hold or move in opposition to the force of gravity. The force also depends on the distance between the objects: the greater the distance the weaker the force.
(G) The attraction gets weaker and weaker as the objects get further apart, but it never disappears altogether. The force never goes to zero. And it never pushes things away.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가 장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　The wheel has been around five thousand years, more or less, so archaeologists tell us. ( ① ) Someone of our forefathers early on noticed that a round log was easier to roll than to carry. ( ② ) The next step was to figure out that heavy objects could be moved by rolling them on three logs, keeping two logs under the load and shifting the log that rolled out the back up to the front. ( ③ ) The next step was to fit a platform on the axle in such a way that the axle stayed in one place and the wheels turned round and round. ( ④ ) This ancient inventor had thus invented the wagon that five thousand years later became a modern car. ( ⑤ ) The wheel business began, speculatively, in Mesopotamia and from there spread to the rest of the Old World ? Europe, Africa, and Asia.
* axle: (바퀴의) 굴대, 차축



40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　According to Johann Herbart, a German philosopher, ideas form as information from the senses combines. The term he used for ideas ? Vorsfellung? encompasses thoughts, mental images, and even emotional states. These make up the entire content of the mind, and Herbart saw them not as static but dynamic elements, able to move and interact with one another. ( ① ) Ideas, he said, can attract and combine with other ideas or feelings, or repulse them, rather like magnets. ( ② ) Similar ideas, such as a color and tone, attract each other and combine to form a more complex idea. ( ③ ) However, if two ideas are unalike, they may continue to exist without association. ( ④ ) This causes them to weaken over time, so that they eventually sink below the “threshold of consciousness.” ( ⑤ ) They repel one another with an energy that propels one of them beyond consciousness, into a place that Herbart referred to as “a state of tendency”; and we now know as “the unconscious.” [3점]
* repulse: 물리치다








?

(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① lack	··· significance	② lack	··· availability
③ reflect	··· accuracy	④ reflect  ··· significance
⑤ highlight ··· accuracy



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)







(C)









(H) 








41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Calculation Practice, No More in Demand Today
② How Fast Is Technology Improving Human Life?
③ Is Technology­Centered Design Suitable for Humans?
④ Displays Make Information Processing More Efficient
⑤ Information Age: A By­Product of Collective Intelligence

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Falling out	② Saving up	③ Keeping up
④ Paying back	⑤ Standing out

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Mark’s brother, Reuben, got a new coat, so Mom decided to make Mark’s winter coat out of Reuben’s old one. She took it apart carefully, cleaned and brushed the pieces and soon there was a nice new coat for Mark. He liked the coat very much, but he did want new buttons on it. But Mom said, “These are good buttons and look fine just as they did on Reuben’s coat.” He protested but when Mom had her mind made up, there was no point in wasting time trying to change it.




43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 엄마는 Reuben의 코트로 Mark의 겨울 코트를 만들었다.
② Nellie는 Mark의 코트에 달린 단추를 씹었다.
③ Mark는 달걀을 직접 가져오려고 헛간으로 갔다.
④ Reuben과 아빠는 Mark의 비명을 듣고 달려왔다.
⑤ 엄마는 Mark의 코트 단추를 결국 바꿔 주기로 했다.


2014학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역
7. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① No problem. I’ll reschedule it.
② I’m sorry, but the desk is sold out.
③ Sure. Do you want to get a refund now?
④ Why not? Our technician will fix it soon.
⑤ Wait a second. I’ll show you another model.
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. I’ve already returned it.
② Sorry, but the book was checked out today.
③ Just remember you have to pay the late fee.
④ Oh my! I didn’t know the library was closed today.
⑤ You don’t have to. This one might be worth reading.
9. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 채소 재배  상자의  사용을 권장하려고
② 채소 위주  식단의  장점을 설명하려고
③ 농작물 재배 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
④ 정원 가꾸기의  심리적  효과를 소개하려고
⑤ 겨울철 채소  섭취의  중요성을 강조하려고

10. 대화를 듣고 남자가 가족 모임에 참석하지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 지하철을  잘못 갈아타서
② 보고서  작성이 늦어져서
③ 컴퓨터를  수리해야 해서
④ 가방을 찾으러 가야 해서
⑤ 지하철 운행이 지연되어서
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 규칙적인 체육 활동이 성적 향상에 도움을 준다.
② 온라인 학습 환경이 개별화 수업에 효과적이다.
③ 명언을 인용하는 것이 주장의 설득력을  높인다.
④ 자신에게 맞는 학습 유형을 찾는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 성적 향상을 위해 구체적인 목표를 설정해야 한다.
12. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 홈스테이 주인 - 유학생	② 부동산 중개인 - 고객
③ 상담 전문가 - 의뢰인	④ 여행가이드 - 관광객
⑤ 식당 종업원 - 손님






37. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  바자회 일정 문의하기	② 신문 구독 신청하기
③  아이들 옷 정리하기	④ 기부할 책 고르기
⑤ 새 옷장 주문하기

38. 대화를 듣고, 배드민턴 동호회 선택 시 고려사항으로 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 집에서의 거리	②  회원들의 실력
③  강습 가능 여부	④  가입비의 유무
⑤ 실내경기 가능 여부

39. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $160	② $180	③ $200	④ $225	⑤ $250

40. The Scribblers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 12세부터 17세까지의 학생들로 구성되어 있다.
② 매주 만나서 뉴스와 책에 대해 토론한다.
③ 매달 동호회의 잡지를 발행한다.
④ 디자인을 제외한 전반적인 잡지 출판 과정에 참여한다.
⑤ 지역 작가들과 기자들로부터 도움을 받는다.
41. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]



①
②
③
④
⑤

1	8

2	영어 영역

42. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
② Yes. I think I should say thank you to him.
③ He should have practiced driving more often.
④ I should think about what car is good for me.
⑤ Sure. That’s why he took me to play golf today.

43. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① I’m afraid I can’t go to your house tomorrow.
② Sure. He’ll help you do your Chinese assignment.
③ What are friends for? It’ll be good for your career.
④ Thanks, but I can make an English version by myself.
⑤ Excellent! I hope it’ll help attract more Chinese tourists.

44. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Dave의 엄마가 Dave에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Dave’s mother:  	

① Wait! Let’s clean the filter first before running it.
② How about turning on the air conditioner right now?
③ Thank you for showing me how to clean out the dust.
④ Be careful. It’s dangerous to play outside in this heat.
⑤ Sorry, but it’s too expensive to fix the air conditioner.




[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

45. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① positive effects of a well­balanced diet
② how to eliminate allergies through diet plans
③ ways to make wholesome homemade baby food
④ benefits of breastfeeding for mothers and babies
⑤ necessity for food intake control while breastfeeding

46. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① onions	② coffee	③ cheese
④ cabbage	⑤ peanuts


47. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Honor your children in celebration of their birthdays or in recognition of their accomplishments by donating a book through the Williams Book Club. You can support our library by immediately adding a new book to its holdings. Diane Jordan, Williams’ Media Specialist, has put together a wish list of books based in part on suggestions from students. Library bound books generally cost $15 or $20. You have the choice to donate either of those amounts. Mrs. Jordan will purchase a book from the list with your monetary donation. Your gift book will have a personalized label inside stating that it was given to Williams Middle School in honor of your child. Your child’s name will be mentioned during the morning show’s Book Club Highlights and the gift book will be placed in a special section of the Media Center featuring Book Club books. If you have questions about the books, please contact Mrs. Jordan at d.jordan@williamsbookclub.com, or phone at 1-800-456-4959.
① 독서 클럽 가입 절차를 안내하려고
② 온라인 도서 구매 방법을 알려주려고
③ 변경된 도서관 이용 방법을 공지하려고
④ 구입 희망 도서 목록 작성을 요청하려고
⑤ 도서 기부를 위한 모금 참여를 권장하려고





48. 다음  글의 요지로  가장 적절한 것은?
 “Where there’s a will with power, there’s  a way.”  The way comes after the will with power. You must be hungry enough, strong enough, resilient enough, to desire change and make change happen. You’ve got the will with power, so now you can define your course. Your course is critical. But there is not any one course for any one journey.  A wise person once told me that what’s important is not so much the path you’re on as the direction you’re headed. You may get bumped off your path, pushed this way and that, but if your direction is true, your journey  will  be true. A roadblock may require a change of path, but your destination remains the same. So what is your way?  It is the path you define, day by day, to get you to your dream. It takes will power to define your way.

① 의지력을 가지고 목표를 향해 나아가야 한다.
②  치밀한  계획을  통해서  다양한  변수에  대비해야 한다.
③  자신의  내면을  성찰하는  시간을  충분히  가져야 한다.
④ 역경에 직면했을 때 전문가의 조언을 얻는 것이 필요하다.
⑤ 목표 성취를 위해 자신의 목표를 주변 사람들에게 알려야 한다.



2	8

영어 영역	3

49. 다음 글에 나타난 필자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 A planning discussion can be fairly complex and fast­paced, causing us to forget things. Take the time to summarize what’s supposed to happen. It could sound something like this: “Let me see if I got this right. Bill, you’ll get the nine copies of the report, stapled with a standard company cover sheet, for the meeting Tuesday at 2 p.m. Is that right?” Bill would probably say, “Right,” and then you could ask him whether there is anything else that you haven’t talked about that might cause a problem. When you ask for the other person’s input, it can help bring to light issues that might otherwise cause problems. However, the real power of this question goes far beyond clarifying understanding. You’re checking for commitment. When the other person eventually says, “I’ll do it,” that person is much more likely to live up to the agreement. Never walk away from a crucial confrontation satisfied with a vague nod. If you care about gaining genuine commitment, give the other person the opportunity to say yes to a very specific agreement.

① 명확한 업무 확인 과정을 통해 상대방의 책무성을 높여라.
② 업무상의 실수에 대해서 관대한 태도를 지녀라.
③ 장기적인 안목을 가지고 업무 계획을 세워라.
④ 지속적인 대화와 이해를 통해 갈등 관계를 해결해라.
⑤ 업무 배정 시 직원들의 업무 능력을 충분히 고려해라.


50. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
 People’s preferences affect decisions about consumption and trade. Not only is there variation in preference across people, but there also is variation based on how much has already been consumed. For example, you might get a lot of pleasure from drinking a cup of coffee in the morning, and be willing to trade $3 for that coffee. But, after finishing that first cup of coffee, the second cup of coffee might not be quite as valuable to you. At some point, you will have had so much coffee that you’re not willing to part with $3 to get another cup. Economists often use the generic term “utility” to refer to the pleasure, value, or usefulness of something that is consumed or experienced. In this example, then, you are making a decision about whether the utility of another cup of coffee is greater than the utility of having $3 to spend on something else.

① independent factors in price­making
② causes of unreasonable consumption
③ the consequences of compulsive consumption
④ limitations of comparing the values of two options
⑤ the influence of diminishing utility on purchase decisions
51. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 It’s no coincidence that some people are just like their dogs. Researchers in Bath, England, conducted an online survey of 1,000 dog owners and found that certain human personality traits link to specific canines. The research claims that if you own a German Shepherd, you’re most likely outgoing. Got a Golden Retriever? Odds are you’re conscientious. A Chihuahua? Research says you’re agreeable. “It seems likely that personality types are subconsciously drawn to certain breeds,” reported study author Lance Workman in a British Psychological Society news release. The study indicates that you may be able to predict someone’s personality based on his or her dog of choice. Of course, lifestyle plays a part too. For example, according to Workman, more active individuals are better suited to athletic, pastoral breeds such as Border Collies, while those who are considered emotionally stable might be suited to hound dogs such as Beagles or Greyhounds.

① Just Stick to Your Belief!
② What Your Dog Says about You
③ Popular Misconceptions about Dogs
④ Dogs: The Cure for a Broken Heart
⑤ Which Animal Would Make a Good Pet?







52. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 A friend of mine mentioned last week that he once bought a Frankies chicken and he discovered after getting home that it was all dry and nasty. ① He took it back to the store and got an immediate refund. Then he decided to write to Walter Robinson, the CEO of Frankies Chickens, and tell ② him that he had bought one of his quality chickens and it was all dry and nasty. By return mail he got a letter from Walter that not only included lengthy apologies and a certificate for a free chicken, but that also asked for ③ his help to make sure it never happened again by asking a whole list of specific questions: Where did he buy it? When? Exactly what was wrong? What did ④ he think had happened? What exactly did the store say when he returned it? Two days later an executive of Frankies Chickens called to make sure ⑤ he had received the letter, to make sure that all was well, and to ask some more specific questions. My friend will never buy anything but Frankies chicken.


3	8

4	영어 영역

53. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
 Not many years ago, schoolchildren were taught that carbon dioxide is the ① naturally occurring lifeblood of plants, just as oxygen is ours. Today, children are more likely to think of carbon dioxide as a poison. That’s because the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere ② has increased substantially over the past one hundred years, from about 280 parts per million to
380. But what people don’t know is that the carbon dioxide level some 80 million years ago ― back when our mammalian ancestors were evolving ― ③ to be at least 1,000 parts per million. In fact, that is the concentration of carbon dioxide you regularly breathe if you work in a new energy­efficient office building, for ④ that is the level established by the engineering group that sets standards for heating and ventilation systems. So not only ⑤ is carbon dioxide plainly not poisonous, but changes in carbon dioxide levels don’t necessarily mirror human activity. Nor has atmospheric carbon dioxide necessarily been the trigger for global warming historically.
54. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
 Whether an animal can feel anything resembling the loneliness humans feel is hard to say. However, highly social animals, such as certain types of parrot, seem to be ① adversely affected when kept alone. Some parrots will engage in bizarre behaviors and can severely harm themselves. Some large parrots will even seem to go insane if subjected to long periods of ② isolation. On the other hand, certain animals that are by nature ③ solitary hardly appear to be affected at all. Some fish, in particular some types of cichlids, will even ④ fight viciously with their own kind if more than one is kept in an aquarium. Guam rails, a kind of flightless bird, are ⑤ tolerant of their own kind, which has obviously made breeding them in captivity very difficult.

55. 다음 글에 드러난 Joseph Bell의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Joseph Bell was a top­class violinist in the world. One day a reporter suggested an experiment to Joseph for a newspaper cover story designed to test Joseph’s musical ability to influence people. But there was one condition: people should not know who he was. Joseph was sure of his musical ability to touch others’ hearts and accepted his proposal without hesitation. On a Friday morning at rush hour, Joseph took his Stradivarius violin, for which he’d paid more than $3 million, and headed to the L’Enfant plaza subway stop in Washington, D.C. He set up shop between an entrance and an escalator, opened his violin case to take donations, seeded it with $20 of his own, and began to perform several complex classical pieces expecting himself surrounded by many pedestrians in a minute. Over the course of his forty­three­minute performance, more than one thousand people passed within a few feet of him. Among them, only one stopped to listen. As time went by, the violin sound faded and he slowly packed up walking away with only $1 earned.
① excited → envious	② anxious → proud
③ despaired → delighted ④ regretful → relieved
⑤ confident → disappointed
56. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Despite the conventional wisdom of some management trainers that group brainstorming is an effective way of generating ideas, more objective research has recently suggested otherwise. ① People working in groups often produce ideas that are fewer in number and lower in quality than the same individuals working for a period alone. ② When people engaging in group problem­solving share their thoughts and information too quickly, none of them has a chance to develop an independent viewpoint before it is subject to influence by the thoughts and experiences of others. ③ People participating in brainstorming build their solutions on the ideas of others, “think them up” and improve them, and this synergy effect allows that better and better ideas are generated. ④ Under such conditions, it has been shown that people tend to converge too rapidly on a solution, or at least on an agreed way of conceptualizing the problem, that may be less than optimal. ⑤ When you insert periods of more solitary thinking between the discussions, you tend to get higher­quality ideas and solutions.
57. 26th Annual Buckeye Book Fair에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



① 작가와 삽화가를 만날 수 있다.
② 입장료는 박람회를  위한  비용으로 사용된다.
③ 어린이들에게 동물 탐구 이벤트를 제공한다.
④ 입장권을 제시하면 무료 주차가 가능하다.
⑤ 집에서 가져온 책에 저자의 사인을 받을 수 있다.


4	8

영어 영역	5

58. Brian Boyle에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
 In 2004, an eighteen­year­old competitive swimmer, Brian Boyle, had to be brought back to life eight times after a dump truck slammed into his car on his way home from swim practice. The force of the horrific crash damaged every major organ in his body. Doctors predicted he would not survive, let alone walk again. But, miraculously, Brian clawed his way back to the living and gradually recovered. In 2007, Brian Boyle staged what many consider to be one of the greatest comebacks in sports history when he crossed the finish line at the Hawaii Ironman just three years after leaving the Intensive Care Unit. In 2009, he published his first book, Iron Heart, and he was presented the Spokesperson of the Year Award from the American Red Cross for his contributions. In 2010, he graduated Cum Laude from St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and also made his very first blood donation at the hospital that brought him back to life. Brian now dedicates his life to competing in triathlons and giving back to the donors who saved him.
* Cum Laude: 우등으로

① 수영 연습을 하러 가는 길에 교통사고를 당했다.
② Hawaii Ironman에 참가하였으나 완주하지는 못했다.
③ 미국 적십자사로부터 상을 받았다.
④ 건강 악화로 대학을 졸업하지 못했다.
⑤ 현재 트라이애슬론 경기에 참가하지 않고 있다.





59. blue sea slug에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 The blue sea slug is a strange­looking marine creature found in the temperate and tropical waters of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans. With the aid of a gas­filled sac in its stomach, the blue sea slug floats at the surface. Due to the location of the gas sac, the blue sea slug floats upside down. They live a pelagic life ― this means they go where the winds and currents take them. Blue sea slugs feed mainly on hydrozoans although they are also known to eat the flesh of their own kind. One of the specialities of their diet is the highly poisonous Portuguese Man­O­War. The blue sea slug can not only swallow its prey’s stinging cells without hurting itself, but also store the swallowed poison inside the up to 84 finger­like structures sticking out of its body, and then use this poison to defend itself against other predators. The blue sea slug is a hermaphrodite, having both male and female reproductive organs.
* hydrozoans: 히드로충류
① 온대 수역과 열대 수역에 서식한다.
② 몸을 뒤집은 상태로 물 표면을 떠다닌다.
③ 동족의 살을 먹기도 하는 것으로 알려져 있다.
④ 독성이  있는 먹이는  삼키지 않는다.
⑤ 암수의  생식기를  모두 가지고 있다.
60. 
다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?









 This graph shows activity rates for three age groups from five countries in 2010. The activity rate represents the proportion of the labor force population to the population of working age. ① The age groups consist of 15­24, 25­54, and 55­64, with the core group of 25­54 showing the highest activity rate for each country. ② The 15­24 group shows the lowest rate in each country. ③ In France and the United Kingdom, the gaps between the 15­24 and 55­64 age groups show just 1%, but the gap between Korea’s 15­24 and 55­64 groups shows the greatest contrast. ④ The percentage of Germany’s 25­54 age group is 10% less than that of Korea’s.
⑤ Italy has the smallest percentage among the five countries’ 55­64 age groups.





[32~33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

61. In a penalty situation in soccer, the ball takes less than 0.3 seconds to travel from the player who kicks the ball to the goal. There is not enough time for the goalkeeper to watch the ball’s trajectory. He must make a decision before the ball is kicked. Soccer players who take penalty kicks shoot one third of the time at the middle of the goal, one third of the time at the left, and one third of the time at the right. Surely goalkeepers have spotted this, but what do they do? They dive either to the left or to the right. Rarely do they stay standing in the middle ― even though roughly a third of all balls land there. Why would they jeopardize saving these penalties? The simple answer:
 	. It looks more impressive and feels less embarrassing to dive to the wrong side than to freeze on the spot and watch the ball sail past. [3점]

① agility	② appearance	③ indecision
④ accuracy	⑤ impatience

5	8

6	영어 영역

62. Recalling childhood memories can 	, according  to  a study  published  in April  in the Journal                  of Personalityand  Social  Psychology. In  a  series   of experiments  done  by Francesca Gino and Sreedhari Desai of Harvard University, participants were more likely  to  help the  experimenters with  an   extra   task,   judge   immoral behavior  harshly, and donate money to charity when they had actively remembered their childhood. The effect held whether the memories were positive or negative ― although, notably, the study subjects did not have traumatic histories. These recollections seem to summon a heightened sense of moral purity. Youngsters may or may not behave especially ethically, but childhood tends to connote innocence ― a frame of mind that affects behavior. “It’s promising research in thinking about ways in which people are following their moral compass with very simple interventions,” Gino says.

① lessen separation anxiety effectively
② lead people to behave more ethically
③ help people overcome behavioral disorder
④ be accompanied by feelings of uncertainty
⑤ boost one’s sense of happiness temporarily



[34~35] 다음 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

63. Imagine that you are French. You are walking along a busy pavement in Paris and another pedestrian is approaching from the opposite direction. A collision will occur unless you each move out of the other’s way. Which way do you step? The answer is almost certainly to the right. Replay the same scene in many parts of Asia, however, and you would probably move to the left. There is no instruction to head in a specific direction. Mehdi Moussaid says this is a behavior brought about by (A) . If two opposing people guess each other’s intentions correctly, each moving to one side and allowing the other past, then they are likely to choose to move the same way the next time they need to avoid a collision. The chance of a successful maneuver increases as more and more people adopt a bias in one direction, until the tendency sticks. Whether it’s right or left does not matter; what does is that it is the unspoken will of the (B) . [3점]

(A) (B)
①  probabilities	……	authority
②  probabilities	……	majority
③  personalities	……	authority
④  personalities	……	majority
⑤  efficiencies	……	conscience
64. 
Even the best journalists can be tricked by lies into presenting misleading news. Sometimes the lies are unconscious. Informants can think they are telling the truth but are really fooling themselves. They may report seeing what they wanted to see. (A) , they report seeing a policeman arresting a youth when he was, in fact, giving the youth directions. You must check the facts, both for your own sake and for the sake of your informants, who would not wish to appear foolish.  Sometimes,  (B)  ,  the  informant is deliberately trying to trick you for his or her own reasons. Perhaps it is to cover up a mistake, perhaps to avoid appearing ignorant, occasionally to give false information for more sinister reasons, such as creating ill­feeling between groups or tricking people into giving money.


(A)

(B)
①
For example
……
however
②
For example
……
as a result
③
Nevertheless
……
similarly
④
Nevertheless
……
in fact
⑤
Furthermore
……
by contrast


[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

65. 
 Competition can be extremely healthy. It drives us to improve, to reach and stretch. Without it, we would never know how far we could push ourselves. In the business world, it makes our economy prosper.

(A) The difference is this: Competition is healthy when you compete against yourself, or when it challenges you to reach and stretch and become your best. Competition becomes dark when you tie your self­worth into winning or when you use it as a way to place yourself above another.
(B) Later, Luke confronts the evil Darth Vader and learns about the “dark side” of the force. As Darth puts it, “You don’t know the power of the dark side.” So it is with competition. There is a sunny side and a dark side, and both are powerful.
(C) But there is another side to competition that isn’t so nice. In the movie Star Wars, Luke Skywalker learns about the positive energy shield called “the force,” which gives life to all things.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


6	8

영어 영역	7
37.	39.




(E) This strategy allows us to exploit a property of networks even if we cannot see the whole structure. Acquaintances have more links and are more central to the network than are the randomly chosen people who named them.
(F) To prevent measles epidemics, for example, 95 percent of the population must be immunized. A more efficient alternative is to target the hubs of the network, namely, those people at the center of the network or those with the most contacts.
(G) However, it is often not possible to discern network ties in advance in a population when trying to figure out how best to immunize it. A creative alternative is to immunize the acquaintances of randomly selected individuals. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.



 Whatever the benefit to a virus of a long­lived host, there is no guarantee that hosts have mechanisms for increasing longevity that the virus could exploit. Nor need host longevity be an advantage. ( ① ) The interests of the virus depend on its life­cycle strategy, and some viruses are only released on the death of the host. ( ② ) In fact, many parasites actually force their host to attack other potential hosts or to be killed or eaten so that the parasites are passed on. ( ③ ) In some ways, this can be seen as a form of life extension because removing the germs could have drastic, possibly fatal effects on the host. ( ④ ) Extreme examples include endosymbiont root fungi in orchids, or mitochondria in our cells. ( ⑤ ) Without them, orchids and humans would not survive. [3점]
* parasitic: 기생하는 **endosymbiont: 다른 생물의 체내에 공생하는



46. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

38.
All participants were equally accurate, but the older group responded more slowly.
Older adults often take longer to make a decision than

young adults do. But that does not mean they are any less sharp. ( ① ) According to research at Ohio State University, the slower response time of older adults has more to do with prizing accuracy over speed. ( ② ) In the study, published recently in the Journal of ExperimentalPsychology:General,college­age students and adults aged
60 to 90 performed timed tests of word recognition and recall. ( ③ ) When the researchers encouraged them to work faster, however, they were able to match the youngsters’ speed without significantly sacrificing accuracy. ( ④ ) “In many simple tasks, the elderly take longer mainly because they decide to require more evidence to make their decision,” says co­author Roger Ratcliff. ( ⑤ ) When an older mind faces a task that requires speed, he says, a conscious effort to work faster can often do the trick.








?


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① provider …… temporary	② provider …… consistent
③ form	…… temporary	④ length	…… immediate
⑤ form	…… consistent


7	8

8	영어 영역

[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)
 It had gone about a thousand yards when it suddenly ground to a halt. The band stopped playing, the crowd stopped cheering. Everyone gazed in wonder as the train slowly backed up and returned to the station. It seemed an eternity until the doors opened and the men started to file out. Someone shouted, “It’s the armistice. The war is over.” For a moment, nobody moved, but then the people heard someone bark orders at the soldiers. My uncle walked down the steps and paraded down the street with other soldiers, as a returning hero, to be welcomed home by the assembled crowd. The next day he returned to (b) his job.
(C)
 One day, the inevitable happened and my uncle Milton received his draft notice. My grandparents were very upset, but my mother, his little sister was thrilled. She was ten years old and my uncle, realizing how (c) he was regarded by his little sister and all of her friends, went out and  bought them all service pins as gifts, which meant that they had a loved one in the service. All the little girls were delighted. When the day came for (d) him to leave, his  whole regiment, in their uniforms, left together from the same train station.	* draft: 징병 ** regiment: [군사] 연대
(H) 


47. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Busy Is Better Than Bored
② Focus on What You Can Do Best
③ Success Lies in What You Believe
④ Just Put Yourself in Others’ Shoes
⑤ Monetary Reward: Your Top Priority?



48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① natural talents
② sense of humor
③ communication skills
④  investment strategies
⑤ emotional intelligence



[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
 My grandfather came from Hungary, and was educated in Germany. He was the only one in his family to come to the United States. He still had relatives living in Europe. When the first World War broke out,  he lamented the fact that if my uncle, his only son, had to go, it would mean that (a) he might fight against his cousins.
49. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

50. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
51. 위 글의 my uncle에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지가 독일에서 교육을 받았다.
② 탑승한 기차가 출발 후 갑자기 멈추었다.
③ 군인들과 함께 거리를 행진했다.
④ 여동생에게  선물을 사주었다.
⑤ 단기간의  군사훈련을 받았다.


8	8
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지	1



6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




6. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No,  thanks.  I  don’t  like pizza.
② Right.  We  can  use  it anytime.
③ Yes. You can get it from a store.
④ It’s okay. You’ll do better next time.
⑤ Sure. You need to download the app first.




7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. I’ll try it.
② Actually, I was too sick.
③ Luckily, I got a high score.
④ Sorry. But I can’t teach you.
⑤ Well, I bought a birthday card.


8. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 직원 채용을 안내하려고
② 화산의 위험성을 경고하려고
③ 야생 동물 보호를 호소하려고
④ 모험 여행 참가자를 모집하려고
⑤ 전통 음식의 우수성을 홍보하려고


9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청소년기 교우 관계의 특성
② 대화 시 언어 선택의 중요성
③ 규칙적인 운동과 건강의 상관관계
④ 봉사 활동이 청소년에게 미치는 영향
⑤ 부모와 십 대 자녀 간의 갈등 해소 방법


10. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 은행원 － 고객	② 아파트 주민 － 경비원
③ 호텔 지배인 － 투숙객	④ 항공기 승무원 － 탑승객
⑤ 편의점 직원 － 택배 기사



38. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to revise the script of the play
② to make a poster for the concert
③ to change the design of a costume
④ to build the stage for the musical
⑤ to confirm the rehearsal schedule

39. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 작년에 병원에 입원했던 이유를 고르시오.
① 상한 우유를 마셔서	② 과식으로 배탈이 나서
③ 독성 식물을 만져서	④ 임상 실험에 참여하려고
⑤ 건강 검진을 받기 위해서

40. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $140	② $180	③ $200	④ $252	⑤ $280

41. 대화를 듣고, 슬라이드 자료에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 디자인	② 글자 크기	③ 음향 효과
④ 사진	⑤ 도표

42. Global  in  Action에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 기관이다.
② 전직 테니스 선수가 설립했다.
③ 1,000명 이상의 회원이 있다.
④ 집 짓는 일을 도와준다.
⑤ 재정적 기부를 받지 않는다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	

43. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 수강할 방과 후 프로그램을 고르시오.




①
②
③
④
⑤

44. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Sorry. I can’t work the night shift.
② No worries. I’ll go to the music store.
③ Definitely. He’ll move in with me soon.
④ Sure. I’ll tell him not to practice late at night.
⑤ That’s okay. He won’t mind playing the guitar.

45. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Don’t worry. I can reserve the seats right away.
② Too bad. I was hoping you could join us.
③ Well done! Now we can enjoy our trip.
④ You’re right. I’d rather take the next flight.
⑤ Thanks. I had a really good time at the festival.

46. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Allison에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu: Allison,   	
① I’ll hand in your paper for you.
② I can help you correct the errors.
③ I can research the Joseon Dynasty.
④ you should watch a historical movie.
⑤ you should buy an English dictionary.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
47. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① tips for a safe hiking trip
② advice for traveling at night
③ qualifications for a park ranger
④ finding shelter in the mountains
⑤ arranging group tours in the wild

48. 고려할 사항으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① weather	② clothing	③ food
④ first aid kit	⑤ emergency supplies
49. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

If you’re one of the countless people whose mind and body have been overworked, you need a program that
will give you a more positive and energetic life: the Health Management Program offered by the ABC Well-Being Institute. This  program  lasts  for  six  weeks and consists of three different  components:  Daily Targets, Walking  Plans,  and  Eating  Plans.  Each week, you’ll be advised by our  health  experts  and introduced to new physical activity  targets.  Are you serious about improving your life immediately? Then, you can start by enrolling in our fantastic  program today.

① 스포츠 센터 강사를 모집하려고
② 건강관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
③ 걷기 운동의 효과를 강조하려고
④ 스트레스의 위험성을 경고하려고
⑤ 약물 남용의 부작용을 설명하려고




50. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Everybody has moments of doubt  about  something  or  other from time to time; it  is  a  natural  process.  The challenge is  not  to  let  those  moments  accumulate  and affect your self-belief. You  will  always  face  the  challenge  of  other  people’s  comments  and  opinion.  There  are   people that you feel good being  around  and  others  you  don’t.  Some  people  give  you  positive  energy  because   they believe in you. You feel  it  and  you  rise  to  the occasion. Others may always have a negative comment to make  about  what  you  are  doing  or  talking  about.  Don’t  let these comments rock your  self-belief.  Always  question  the person’s  reason  for  the  comment.  If  it  is  based  on  fact, you  should  listen;  if  not,  then  it  is  only  their  opinion. You will need to stay strong.
* rise to the occasion: 위기 상황에서 능력을 발휘하다
① 인맥이 넓은 사람들과 교제하라.
② 성공하기 위해 도전적인 자세를 가지라.
③ 일시적 감정으로 타인을 비판하지 말라.
④ 좌절감을 느낄 때는 성공한 경험을 생각하라.
⑤ 선별적인 의견 수용으로 자기 확신이 흔들리지 않게 하라.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


51. 다음 글에 드러난 Delia의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Delia stepped out  of  the  front  door  of  her  house, and  the  day welcomed her with a warm and sunny  smile.  With  each step, she thought, “I can’t   wait   for  today’s  class.”   Her  family had recently moved  into  the  neighborhood,  and  the  new school  year  had  just  begun  at  Elanova  High  School.  Her new school offered ballet lessons, and Delia eagerly signed up. She was one step closer to fulfilling her lifelong  dream of becoming a ballerina. Delia sat at the bench  waiting for the school bus. As the bus rolled down Madison Avenue, she slipped her hand into her ballet bag to touch  her new shoes. She thought about working hard  on her leaps and jumps. “I want to soar to the moon,” Delia thought.
① hopeful	② bored	③ relaxed
④ worried	⑤ scared

52. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One reason many people keep  delaying  things  they  should do is that they fear they will do them wrong or  poorly, so   they just don’t do them at all. For example, one of the best ways to write a book is to write it as quickly as possible, getting your thoughts onto paper without regard to  style.  Then, you can  go  back  to  revise  and  polish  your  writing.  If I only wrote when  I  knew  it  would  be  perfect,  I’d  still be working on my first book! Do you have a hard time  relaxing if your house is a mess? Do you beat yourself up      for making mistakes? I’ve got a simple message for  you  today: It’s time to let go of your perfectionism. It becomes       a stumbling block that keeps you stuck.
① 잦은 실수는 큰 실수를 유발한다.
② 주변을 정리하는 습관이 중요하다.
③ 책을 집필하기 위해서는 인내가 필요하다.
④ 완벽주의는 일을 추진하는 데 방해가 된다.
⑤ 타인의 입장에서 생각하는 것이 바람직하다.

53. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Textiles and clothing have functions that go beyond just protecting the body. Dress and textiles alike are used as a means  of  nonverbal  communication.   Obvious   examples  would be the use of uniforms to communicate  a  particular  social role and the modern white  wedding dress Western cultures use to mark this rite of passage. Both types of clothing communicate important information nonverbally  to the onlooker. The female wearing  the  white  dress  is about  to be married and change her status and role  in  society.  The  person in the uniform has some specialized   function  in  society, such as police officer, nurse, or soldier. Therefore,  it  can be said that clothing visually communicates information  about group membership and functions as an identity marker.
① educational functions of uniforms
② ways to diversify styles of clothing
③ gender differences in choosing clothing
④ different cultural norms of Western society
⑤ nonverbal communicative functions of clothing
54. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Traditional consumption was  not particularly thrifty. The concept of thrift emerged out  of a more  affluent  money  culture. In traditional societies  where  resources  continued  to  be scarce,  consumption  was more seasonally  and communally orientated. In years of bountiful crops people ate heartily, and in lean years they starved. People were not particularly motivated to produce more goods for  stockpiling, as there was  little  incentive   to  do  so  where  there was little security from raids. When times were good, celebrations of  gluttony  were   held  in  the  winter  season  when stocks could not be refilled. These rituals were more important than the potential hardships such  celebrations might later bring, as they served to bind people together and distribute resources. Holiday rituals were typically structured around cultural practices such as song, dance, theater, and feasting, and took a great deal of time away from work.
* affluent: 풍부한
** gluttony: 폭식
① What Motivated Traditional Consumption?
② Communal Production of Winter Foods
③ Refilling Stocks: A Survival Necessity
④ How to Survive after a Bad Harvest
⑤ What Constitutes Holiday Rituals?

55. Stonehenge Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
STONEHENGE TOUR
The great and ancient stone circle of Stonehenge is one of the  greatest wonders of the world.
Enjoy the stones with a fascinating audio-guided tour, in the language of your choice!
Included Highlights
?Express  Service  to  Stonehenge  by  Luxury  Bus
?Stonehenge  Guidebook
Prices   &  Bus Departures
?Adults:  ?44.00	Children (3-12):  ?39.00 Seniors (60 and over) / Students: ?42.00
?Days:  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday
?Times  &  Places:  10:00 am,  Royal  National  Hotel
11:00 am, Victoria Station
To secure your seat, please arrive at  least  15  minutes  prior to departure or book online 24 hours in advance.
① audio  guide는 영어로만 제공된다.
② Stonehenge  안내서는 제공되지 않는다.
③ 60세 이상의 노인들은 무료이다.
④ 버스는 오전에만 출발한다.
⑤ 좌석 확보는 온라인 예약으로만 가능하다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


56. Kids Library Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Kids Library Camp Premont Library
(July 29 & 30, 2015)
★ A 2-day camp for  children  aged  6  and  over (Children under 6 must be accompanied by an adult.)
★ Time: 1:00 pm - 6:00 pm, on both days
★ Learn How To:
- use library facilities
- produce online videos
- create your own story books
?Spaces  are  limited,  so  advance  registration  is  required. Registrations are accepted only at www.premont.lib.
?No  registration  fee
?For  further  details,  contact  Ms.  Huggon
at huggon@premont.lib or (877) 123-4567.

① 6세 미만의 어린이는 어른을 동반해야 한다.
② 캠프는 오후에 진행된다.
③ 도서관 시설의 이용 방법을 배운다.
④ 캠프 참가 사전 등록이 필요하다.
⑤ 캠프 등록비를 내야 한다.

57. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?












　The pie charts above  show  the  Breakdown  of  Solid Waste, particularly focusing  on  Domestic  Waste,  of  the  state of New South Wales, Australia.  ① With  regard  to  Total Urban Solid Waste, the percentage of Commercial & Industrial is more  than  twice  as  high  as  that  of Construction & Demolition. ② The Domestic  category  makes up about a third of Total Urban Solid Waste. ③ Of Domestic Waste, Food & Garden accounts for the highest percentage, while the percentage of Ferrous is the lowest.
④ Other Waste is 15% of Domestic Waste, which is  five times higher than  the  percentage  of  Plastics.  ⑤ Diapers  and Glass each are less than  five  percent  of  Domestic  Waste.
* ferrous: 철(쇠)의
58. 
living rock cactus에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Living rock cactus is one of the most peculiar plants found in the desert. For  most  of  the  year,  it  blends  into the rocky limestone soils of the Dead Horse Mountains,
Mariscal Mountain, and the  hills  along  the  Rio  Grande.  You may step on one before  you  notice  it.  Spineless  and  flat against the ground,  it  has  triangular  tubercles  that overlap in a star-shaped pattern. In extremely dry conditions, living rock cactus  is  almost  invisible:  it  literally  shrinks  into the surrounding rocky soil. Moisture is  stored  in  the  root, and during droughts the  root  shrinks,  dragging  the  stem underground. These spineless plants  survive  by  blending  into  their  native  habitat.  As  added  protection, they  store  foul-tasting,  poisonous  alkaloids  in  their  bodies.
* limestone: 석회암
** tubercle:  작은 돌기
① 사막에서 발견되는 특이한 식물 중 하나이다.
② 삼각형 모양의 작은 돌기를 가지고 있다.
③ 매우 건조한 조건에서는 눈에 거의 보이지 않는다.
④ 가뭄 기간에는 뿌리가 팽창한다.
⑤ 독성이 있는 알칼로이드를 체내에 저장한다.






59. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The term objectivity is important in measurement because   of the scientific demand that observations  be  subject  to  public verification. A measurement  system  is  objective  to  the extent that two observers (A) evaluate / evaluating the  same performance arrive at the same (or very similar) measurements. For example, using a tape measure  to  determine the distance a javelin (B) threw / was thrown yields very similar results regardless of who reads the tape. By comparison, evaluation of performances such as diving, gymnastics, and figure skating is more subjective ─ although elaborate scoring rules help make (C) it / them more objective. From the point of view of research in motor behavior, it is important to use performances in the  laboratory  for  which  the scoring can be as objective as possible.
* javelin: 투창

(A) (B)	(C)
① evaluate      …… threw	…… it
② evaluate      …… threw	…… them
③ evaluating  …… threw	…… it
④ evaluating …… was thrown …… them
⑤ evaluating …… was thrown …… it




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


60. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　A special feature of the real estate rental market is its tendency to undergo a severe and prolonged  contraction  phase, more so than with manufactured products. When the supply of a manufactured product  ① exceeds  the  demand, the manufacturer cuts back on output, and the merchant reduces  inventory  to  balance  supply  and  demand.  However,  ② property  owners  cannot  reduce   the amount of space available for  rent  in  their  buildings.  Space  that  was constructed to accommodate business and  consumer  needs at the  peak  of  the  cycle  ③ remains,  so  vacancy  rates climb and the downward trend becomes more severe. Rental rates generally do  not  drop  below  a  certain  point,  the ④ maximum that must be charged in order to cover operating expenses. Some owners will take space off the market rather than lose money on it. A few, unable to  subsidize the property, will  sell  at  distress  prices,  and lenders will  repossess  others.  These  may  then  be  placed  on the market at lower  rental  rates,  further  ⑤ depressing  the market.
* contraction  phase: 경기 수축기(후퇴기)
** distress price: 투매 가격(판매자가 손해를 감수하는 매우 싼 가격)








61. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Born in Budapest to a family of  bankers,  von  Neumann was undeniably bright. At age eight, ① he had mastered calculus. At age twelve, he was reading works aimed at professional mathematicians.  But  ② he  also  loved  to  invent mechanical toys and became a child expert on  Byzantine history. When it  was  time  to  go  off  to  university, he agreed to study chemical engineering as a compromise with his father, who feared that ③ his son couldn’t make a living as a mathematician.  Von  Neumann kept  his  bargain  by  enrolling  at  the  University   of Budapest and promptly leaving for  Berlin,  where  he  spent his time doing mathematics, and  returning  to  Budapest  at  the end of every semester to  take  examinations.  He  published ④ his second mathematics paper, in  which  he  gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, at  age nineteen. By age  twenty-five  ⑤ he  had  published  ten  major papers; by age thirty, nearly three dozen.
* calculus: 미적분학

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
62. Not all interesting discoveries have  an  obvious  application.  If  you  believe  you  have  something,  but   you’re not sure what exactly  it’s  going  to  be  good  for,  don’t give up. Many innovations  languished  in  labs  for  years  until  they  were 	. Teflon, an extremely slippery synthetic substance  employed  as  a  coating on cooking utensils, was invented in 1938, but  it  didn’t coat its  first  pan  till  1954.  The  Post-it  note  was  built  on  the  back  of  some  not-very-good   glue.   Its inventor  believed  it  might  have  value,  but  it  took  him  five years to  find  a  potentially  profitable  use  for  it.  HP  had   a   breakthrough   with   a   super-accurate   thermometer
that was created  in  the  HP  Labs.  Despite  its  accuracy,  there was no clear use for the device until it was used to measure fluctuations in ocean temperature. [3점]
* languish: 시들해지다
① replaced by new ones
② matched to a product
③ backed up by a theory
④ found  to  be eco-friendly
⑤ tested  for  their accuracy








63. Empathy is a character trait that  we  value  in  ourselves  and in our friends, colleagues, and the professionals  who  serve us. The know-how to be empathetic is central to  practical wisdom: unless we can  understand  how  others  think and feel, it’s difficult to know  the  right  thing  to  do. But empathy has its dark side: too much understanding and sensitivity, too much seeing things from the other’s perspective,  can 	. Edmund Pellegrino, a scholar of bioethics, explains it  like  this: “If a physician  identifies  too  closely  as  co-sufferer  with the patient, she loses the objectivity  essential  to  the  most precise assessment of what is wrong, of what can be
done, and of what should be done to meet those needs. Excessive  co-suffering  also  impedes  and  may  even  paralyze the physician into a state of inaction.”
* impede: 방해하다
① block everlasting friendship
② justify doctors’ abuse of power
③ cloud judgment and paralyze choice
④ lead to a hasty but correct diagnosis
⑤ decrease doctors’ compassion for patients



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


64. Bees  have  their  choice  of  flora  according  to   color. Lord Avenbury once made  an  experiment  to  see  if  the  color of flowers attracted bees. Placing honey on slips  of  paper of different shades, he found that the insects which visited  them  seemed  to  have  a  marked  preference  for  blue, after which came  white,  yellow,  red,  green  and  orange. This finding should be  considered  for  our  beekeeping planning. If pollination  is  the  prime  consideration of taming bees and if the crop is identified,
 	  while planning. Let us consider beekeeping near a mustard field. Mustard  gives tiny yellow flowers full of  nectar  and  pollen.  For  better  yield  of  mustard  seeds,  pollination  is   necessary.  But if there is  plenty  of  blue-colored  wild  flora  nearby,  bees  may  prefer  the  blue  flowers  to  mustard.   Although  we shall get honey and other products, the objective for pollination of mustard may be defeated. [3점]
* flora: 식물군
① bees’ preference for color should be put aside
② a greater harvest can be expected near blue flora
③ the quality of honey should be taken into account
④ the abundance of blue flora nearby must be ensured
⑤ the color of other floras nearby should be considered



65. In the mid-1900s, John Kenneth Galbraith shocked  the  field  of  economics  when  he  insisted  that  consumers  do  not  merely  participate  in  the  marketplace,  they  are  also  the product of the systematic deployment  of  power throughout society. Within this deployment of power, commercial  media  ensures  that  consumers  adopt   values and beliefs that match the general requirements of the economy. The individual’s participation in mass behavior patterns  is 	. Consumers engage in shared patterns  of  consumption  because  they  live  within  an  economic  system   that  operates as a belief system. It exercises considerable
control over the meaning and value of things. When the economy  functions  as  a  belief  system,  it  establishes   severe limits on a consumer’s  free  choice.  As  consumers,  our choices are not entirely our own. Our beliefs, values, thoughts,  and  emotions  are  highly  conditioned  to   match the needs of the marketplace. [3점]
* deployment: 배치
① not driven by commercial media’s agenda
② a product of unconditioned personal choice
③ not a spontaneous reaction to random forces
④ not affected by the needs of the marketplace
⑤ an outcome irrelevant to the economic system
66. 
주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

(A) In crying out, the danger-spotting  squirrel  draws  attention  to  itself,  which  may  well  attract  the  predator. Scientists used to think  that  animals  would  risk their lives like this only for kin with whom they shared common genes.
(B) This  wisdom  holds  outside  the  human  family  circle   as well.  For  example,  when  one  ground  squirrel  sees  a predator in the distance, it will  sound  an  alarm  call that  alerts  other  squirrels  to  run  for  cover.  It’s   a risky move.
(C) New evidence suggests, however, that squirrels also sound alarm calls for former playmates, not genetically related. These squirrels developed a social resource while playing ― and these buddies will put their lives on the line to save their playmates.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



[36～37] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
67. 

　Self-fulfilling prophecies can have a positive  side.  ( ① ) We know that students introduced to their teachers as “intellectual  bloomers”  often  do  better  on  achievement  tests than do their counterparts who lack such a positive introduction. (  ② )  In  a  study  of  army  tank  crews,  one  set of tank commanders was told  that  some  members  of  their assigned crews had exceptional abilities while others  were only average.  (  ③ )  In  reality,  the  crew  members  had been assigned randomly so  that  the  two  test  groups  were equal in  ability.  (  ④ )  The  commanders  later  reported that the so-called “exceptional” crew members performed better than the “average” ones. ( ⑤ ) The self-fulfilling effects in these cases strongly suggest that managers adopt positive and optimistic approaches toward others at work.
* bloomer: 재능을 발휘하는 사람


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


68. 



But neither are aware of this fact when it comes to unmarked crosswalks.

Studies do show that motorists are more likely to yield

39. One of the many strengths of the African American community is an intrinsic support for the athletic endeavors    of African American girls and women. ① Since African American culture appreciates a greater flexibility of gender roles and accepts a broader range of gender-appropriate

to pedestrians in marked crosswalks than at unmarked crosswalks. But as some researchers found, that does not necessarily make things safer. ( ① )  When  they  compared the  way  pedestrians  crossed  at  both  kinds  of  crosswalks  on roads with considerable traffic volumes, they found that people at unmarked crosswalks tended to look both  ways  more often, waited more often for gaps  in  traffic,  and  crossed the road more quickly. (  ② )  Researchers  suspect that both drivers and  pedestrians  are  more  aware  that  drivers  should  yield  to  pedestrians  in  marked  crosswalks.   ( ③ ) Not knowing traffic safety laws, it  turns  out,  is  actually a good thing for  pedestrians.  (  ④ )  Because  they do not know whether cars are supposed to  stop,  they  act  more cautiously. (  ⑤ )  Marked  crosswalks,  by  contrast, may give pedestrians an unrealistic picture of their  own  safety. [3점]









[38～39]  다음  글에서   전체  흐름과   관계  없는   문장을 고르시오.
38. Some researchers investigated the  effects  of  different  media on children’s ability  to  produce  imaginative  responses. In one study, children in grades one through four were separated  randomly  into  two  groups  and  presented  with  the same fictional  story.  One  group  listened  to  the  story  via radio, while the other group watched the story on a television. ① Afterward, all of  the  children  were  asked what they thought would happen next in the story. ② The researchers  rated  children’s  imaginativeness  by  recording the novel elements (such  as  characters,  setting,  dialogue,  and feelings) they used  in  their  responses.  ③ Some novelists prefer to  include  as  many  characters  as  possible  in their stories. ④ The children who listened to the radio produced more imaginative responses, whereas the children who watched the television produced more words  that  repeated the original story.  ⑤ Media  scholars  have  used  this study to illustrate the “visualization hypothesis,” which states that children’s exposure to ready-made visual images restricts  their  ability  to  generate  novel  images  of  their own.

behaviors, African American women are not as bound  as  white women by gender role stereotypes. ② Athletics  for  girls and women is not perceived as conflicting with an African American female’s gender role.  ③ Hall  and  Bower’s study of African American females found that African American women defined  themselves  as  “softly  strong” ― owning  both strength and femininity without conflict. ④ African American males have played  an  increasingly  important  role in global politics. ⑤ Welcome support from the African American community has energized many African American girls and women to participate in sports.

46. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





(A) (B)
① challenging …… distorts
② demanding           …… activates
③ comprehensible   …… increases
④ difficult	…… hinders
⑤ accessible	…… stimulates



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 



(C) 
　As  he came around a sloping curve on his bicycle, Jim     hit  a  car  parked  on  the  side  of  the  road.  (c) He  ended  up in the  hospital.  Besides  bad  cuts  on  his  head,  he  broke his right arm and was in  a  cast  for  two  months.  Jim’s doctor gave him a series of tests.  The  doctor  concluded  that  (d) he  had  suffered  nerve  damage   and  that he might never regain the full use of his right arm.















47. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Innate  Advantages  of  the Strong
② How Are the Superior Determined?
③ Population Growth in Marine Life
④ Why Do Species Avoid Competing?
⑤ Every Aspect of a Species’ Lifestyle

48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① shifting balance	② fixed hierarchy
③ strong  dependency	④ lasting collaboration
⑤ one-way relationship

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Jim Nelson, a junior at Manti High School, was an outstanding athlete. He  had  just  made  the  school  basketball team, one of the best in  the  state.  But  on  October 23, 1996, most of (a) his athletic  future  was suddenly taken away  from  him.  Jim  was  riding  his  bicycle at night to visit  his  friend.  The  road  was  very  steep in some places. It was very dark and difficult to see.

(D)
　Jim never became a starter,  but  he  was  always  the  first substitute to go in the game. Jim  got  a  chance to play in the last 30 seconds of the championship  game when a starting player sprained (e) his ankle. With 10 seconds left, Jim balanced the ball in his left hand and   took the shot. The crowd was  deathly  quiet  until ―  swish! He made the three-point-shot  left-handed!  Jim  won not only the game but also the hearts of  his  teammates for proving that with determination,  no  obstacle is too great.

49. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

50. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

51. 위 글의 Jim에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Manti  고등학교의 뛰어난 운동선수였다.
② 부상당한 해의 남은 경기에는 선수로 참여하지 못했다.
③ 자전거를 타고 가다가 주차된 차에 부딪쳤다.
④ 챔피언 결정전에 처음부터 출전했다.
⑤ 왼손으로 3점 슛을 성공시켰다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2014학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① You’re right. He’s a great singer.
② That’s a very good idea. Let’s go.
③ Sorry. All the tickets are sold out.
④ Hurry up. We’re late for the show.
⑤ No. Our seats are close to the stage.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, she is. I’m really proud of my mother.
② Not yet. The ceremony will begin at 10 a.m.
③ Yes. She wants to major in history in college.
④ Why don’t you buy a flower basket for your mother?
⑤ That’s incredible! Why does she want to go to college?



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 학교 급식 메뉴 선정 기준을 설명하려고
② 학교 홈페이지 제작 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 학교 급식 만족도 설문 조사 결과를 발표하려고
④ 학교 급식 메뉴 건의 방식 변경을 안내하려고
⑤ 방학 중 학생 식당 보수 공사 계획을 공지하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 감상이 집중력 향상에 미치는 영향
② 공원 내 자전거 전용 도로 설치의 필요성
③ 보행자 안전을 위한 교통 체계 개선 방안
④ 헤드폰으로 음악을 들으며 걷는 것의 위험성
⑤ 공공장소에서 음악을 들을 때 지켜야 할 예절



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 래프팅 수강생 ? 강사	② 관광객 ? 여행 가이드
③ 호텔 투숙객 ? 접수원	④ 고객 ? 옷가게 주인
⑤ 비행기 승객 ? 비행기 승무원



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사다리 빌려 주기
② 주방의 전구 갈아 주기
③ 거실에 칠할 페인트 골라 주기
④ 재고 정리 세일 기간 알아봐 주기
⑤ 상점에서 집까지 차로 데려다 주기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 목요일에 스터디 그룹 모임에 참석할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 시험 준비를 해야 해서
② 방과후학교 시간과 겹쳐서
③ 할아버지 병문안을 가야 해서
④ 다른 친구들과 약속이 있어서
⑤ 병원에 진료를 받으러 가야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 자선 단체에 전달할 총 성금액을 고르시오.
[3점]
① $60	② $70	③ $80	④ $90	⑤ $100

10.대화를  듣고,  여자가  사고  싶어  하는  드레스에  관해  두  사람  이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 판매처	② 옷감	③ 색상	④ 길이	⑤ 가격

1.Waterfront Town Movie Night에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일 치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 11월 6일에 개최된다.
② 영화감독이 관객을 만나는 시간이 있다.
③ 오후 6시부터 팝콘과 음료가 제공된다.
④ 모든 연령의 사람들이 관람할 수 있다.
⑤ 수익금은 주민 체육 시설을 보수하는 데 사용된다.




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  선택할  서비스를
고르시오.

Home Cleaning Services



①
②
③
④
⑤

13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① Well, it’s hard to join the writing club.
② Okay. You can borrow the camera anytime.
③ Me, too. I’d like to take pictures of the students.
④ Yeah. I heard it took a whole year to complete it.
⑤ Yes. Students are encouraged to grow their own plants.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Right. I envy your daughter for having a father like you.
② No. I didn’t expect the movie would be so good.
③ I’m worried about her, but she doesn’t listen to me.
④ My pleasure. I’ll take her to the concert for you.
⑤ It’s okay. You can go to the concert next time.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Rachel이  사서에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Rachel:  	
① I won’t forget to return the book in time.
② That’s because I couldn’t borrow the book.
③ I’m planning to be a librarian in the future.
④ I lost the borrowed book, so I bought a new one.
⑤ I’d like to borrow one of the books in the reading list.

[16 ∼ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 재활용 제품을 판매하는 회사를 홍보하려고
② 재활용 제품의 제작 아이디어를 공모하려고
③ 재활용 센터 운영의 개선 방안을 제안하려고
④ 폐품을 이용한 예술 작품 전시회를 안내하려고
⑤ 폐품 재활용이 환경에 미치는 영향을 설명하려고

17.언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① baskets	② backpacks	③ curtains
④ drinking glasses ⑤ clocks

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 새로 개원한 병원을 홍보하려고
② 구강 검진 결과에 대해 알려 주려고
③ 약 복용 시 주의 사항을 설명하려고
④ 병원 예약 날짜와 시간을 통보하려고
⑤ 치과 정기 검진을 받을 것을 권유하려고



19.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　People in reasonably good health at the age of 60 can now expect to live close to thirty more years. These can be the happiest years of their lives, since the pressures of earning a living, building a career, and raising a family are behind them. Workers can use their “golden years” to do many of the things they had always hoped to do, but never had the opportunity to do because of their 40­plus­hour workweeks. Unfortunately, the cost of these additional retirement years can present a problem if there is insufficient financial preparation. Therefore, a retirement plan needs to be set in motion at an early stage of life to assure that retirement is all that it can be.
① 삶의 질 향상을 위해 주당 근무 시간을 줄여야 한다.
② 은퇴 후에는 안정성에 바탕을 두고 자산을 관리해야 한다.
③ 노년의 건강한 삶을 위해 적절한 취미 활동을 찾아야 한다.
④ 은퇴 후의 삶을 위해 일찍부터 재정적인 준비를 해야 한다.
⑤ 고령화 사회에 진입함에 따라 근로자의 정년을 연장해야 한다.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The two­year­old child dances for her father when he comes home, before he takes her in his arms. The smallest child who is capable of any action is capable of making it worth watching, of capturing adult attention for a time. As we grow up we learn that we cannot expect the attention of others as often as we would like to have it; still we are watchers of ourselves and of each other, and if we believe in God or gods we believe we are being watched from above. Even if we don’t, we can’t always escape the thought that our parents are watching us. In deciding what to do or how to do it, we often ask ourselves what these watchers would think of us. And then we pretend. We tell ourselves stories about what we are doing as individuals, framing our actions all the while as deserving an audience. To imagine yourself totally without an audience would be painful and difficult.
① 우리는 가정 교육을 통해 적절한 사회 규범을 배운다.
② 우리는 누군가가 우리를 지켜봐 주기를 바라며 행동한다.
③ 부모는 자기 자녀의 실수에 더 엄격한 기준을 적용한다.
④ 주변 사람의 관심은 어린이의 창의력 발달을 촉진시킨다.
⑤ 부모와의 신체적 접촉은 자녀의 정서적 안정에 도움을 준다.

2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There are a variety of currents in the oceans, and because they move and mix the water they will influence various aspects of the environment. One especially important environmental impact of currents is that they can move nutrients from deep water to the surface, where these nutrients can be used by plants, in the photosynthetic process, to produce organic matter. Currents can also disperse waste products, eggs, larvae, and adult life­forms. Some fish lay their eggs in or near a current, which may then carry the eggs and young into an environment favorable for growth. By mixing ocean water, currents keep water­temperature changes to a minimum. Turbulence caused by currents adds oxygen to the water ― oxygen that fish need.	* turbulence: (물결의) 휘몰아침
① effects of currents on the environment of marine life
② changes in ocean currents caused by global warming
③ various ways of using currents in scientific research
④ the relationship between fish species and fishing
⑤ types of ocean currents and their characteristics


25. Hillsdale Library Reading Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?















21.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　In one study, fourteen­month­olds watched an adult experimenter bend over and activate a light by pressing the button with her head. For some of the infants, the adult’s hands were bound by a blanket. The babies were then given the light switch to play with. Infants who saw the adult whose arms were bound activated the light switch with their hand because they understood that the adult was unable to use their hands. However, if they were the ones who saw that the adult’s hands were free, then the infants bent over and activated the button with their head, too. They must have reasoned that it was important to use the head and not the hands. Infants were not simply copying the actions but rather repeating the intended goal.
① What the Body Language Means to Adults



















① 11월 1일부터 30일 동안 책을 읽는다.



















* raffle: 복권 추첨

② Infants’ Unconditional Imitation of Adults
③ Infants Get Satisfaction from Bodily Movements
④ Infants’ Ability to Understand Why Beyond How
⑤ What Matters in Mind Reading: Not Why but Who

② 읽을 책을 최소한 다섯 권 이상 선정해야 한다.
③ 독후감 한 편당 복권 추첨에 응모할 표를 한 장씩 받는다.
④ 독서 시상 파티는 11월 27일에 네 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 월요일부터 금요일까지 도서관을 방문해서 등록할 수 있다.




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

26. Weber University Junior Scholars Program에 관한 다음 안
내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 11학년과 12학년 학생들이 3주 동안 참여한다.
② 대학 학점을 취득할 수 있다.
③ 대학 입학과 대인 관계에 관한 세미나에 참석해야 한다.
④ 다양한 스포츠 활동에 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 과정 첫째 주에 Queens Island로 현장 학습을 간다.




25.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In most wilderness, the majority of groups ① visiting the area are small ― usually between two and four people. But large groups do visit wilderness, and their potential to disturb campsites differs from ② that of small groups. Although the effect of party size on campsites has never been formally studied, it makes sense that a large group can cause impacts on an undisturbed site more ③ rapidly than a small group. For example, along the New River in West Virginia, the area of vegetation loss on sites used by large commercial rafting companies ④ were more than four times larger than the area on sites used by small groups of fishermen. At well­established campsites, however, a big group need not be a problem, as long as activities are ⑤ confined within the boundaries of the existing site.

26.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
How America Spends Money:
100 Years in the Life of the Family Budget


　The graph above shows the changes in the percentage of spending on five components in the American family budget for about a century from 1900 to 2003. ① During the whole period, the proportion of spending on food dropped most sharply and it took up less than 15 percent in 2003. ② On the other hand, the percentage of spending on housing increased steadily, and in 2003 it eventually surpassed the percentage of spending on food. ③ In the case of apparel, the percentage steadily decreased during the period, and it was the second smallest among the five components in 2003. ④ For half a century from 1900 to 1950, the proportion of spending on health care remained the same, and then it rose to about 6 percent in 2003. ⑤ From 1950 to 2003, the percentages of spending on two components decreased, but the percentages of spending on three components increased.




27.coral bean에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Whether in flower or in fruit, coral bean is one of the most striking plants in the American Southwest. Much of the year, however, the leafless brown stems are scarcely noticeable in their rocky hillside habitat. In June, clusters of red flowers sprout from the stem tips, attracting hummingbirds. Leaves appear once the summer rains start, usually in July. Coral bean plants are most noticeable in the autumn when their leaves have turned golden and the brown pods reveal the (occasionally light brown) seeds. Alkaloids make coral bean seeds highly toxic. In the Southwest, winter temperatures prevent coral bean from growing much taller than three feet, but in the frost­free parts of northern Mexico, it is a small tree up to twenty feet tall.
① 6월에 줄기 끝에서 빨간 꽃이 핀다.
② 여름 우기가 시작되면 잎이 나온다.
③ 가을에 잎이 황금색으로 변하고 씨앗이 드러난다.
④ 씨앗은 독성이 매우 강하다.
⑤ 미국 남서부 지역에서는 겨울에도 20피트 이상 자란다.




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

28.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적
절한 것은?
　In “The Frog Prince” story, a princess loses her favorite ball in a pond. However, a frog appears and promises to retrieve her ball if she lets him eat at her table, drink from her cup, and sleep in her bed. (A) Desperate / Unwilling to have her ball back, the princess agrees, but when the frog appears at her door the next day she is disgusted by the prospect of being truthful and fulfilling her promise. But her father, the king, gives her no choice and she is (B) compelled / forbidden to carry out her promise. When the promise has been fulfilled the frog disappears, its place being taken by a handsome prince with whom she falls in love. Grateful that she has been truthful and kept her promise, even if it was at her father’s
(C) indifference / insistence , the prince marries the princess and they live happily ever after.


①
(A)
Desperate

······
(B)
compelled

······
(C)
indifference
②
Desperate
······
compelled
······
insistence
③
Desperate
······
forbidden
······
indifference
④
Unwilling
······
compelled
······
indifference
⑤
Unwilling
······
forbidden
······
insistence














29.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Benny Tee was one of my very good friends. He ran a retail shoe store near my house. Two weeks before Christmas a poor man walked into Benny’s store. Looking around at all the shoes, he asked, “Are you Mr. Tee?” and Benny said, “Yes.” “I want a special pair of shoes for ① my son.” Standing next to him was an eleven­year­old boy dressed in shabby clothes. Benny looked down at the boy’s feet and saw that ② he had club feet. His father explained, “The one thing my son wants for Christmas is a pair of shoes like the other kids. Could you make them for ③ him?” Benny said, “Yes, but it will take time to order a special kind of leather to make shoes for ④ him. I can’t promise they’ll be done by Christmas.” The leather didn’t come until the 24th. It took Benny until 4:00 in the morning of Christmas Day to complete his work. But when ⑤ he kindly delivered the special pair of shoes to the boy’s home, Benny Tee received the best Christmas gift of his life. He received Joy.
* club foot: 선천적으로 안쪽으로 굽은 발

[30 ~ 32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. Fundamental to most moral approaches is the idea that human life has a special dignity and value that is worth
preserving even at the expense of self­interest. From this belief it follows, as Charles Beitz notes in his classic work Political                  Theory                     and          International                           Relations,                            “that     there     are occasions when we have reasons to disregard the demands of self­interest by taking a moral point of view towards human affairs.” This requires, says Beitz, that we regard the world and our actions in it from the standpoint of one person among many rather than as a particular person with particular interests. This position requires us to choose courses of action, policies, rules, and institutions on grounds that would be acceptable to any agent who was  	 among competing interests involved. [3점]
① impartial	② ambitious	③ renowned
④ selfish	⑤ imaginative



















34. People who use visualization as a support for cancer treatment and other life­threatening illnesses have discovered the importance of 	. For example, after
Carl’s cancer diagnosis he began visualizing the cancer cells being killed by soldiers. It was only after work with his therapist that he realized this could not be effective for him as he had been a committed pacifist for a long time. His subconscious would not easily welcome a warlike image. He settled on using an image of the cancer cells being rescued from their path of destruction by angels and taken to a place of reeducation where they could become “good” cells. It worked for him, and he is convinced that his belief in the principle and his consistency in practicing it positively supported his medical treatment and cure. [3점]
* pacifist: 평화주의자
① focusing on symptoms
② frequency of treatment
③ careful image selection
④ support from family members
⑤ using high­tech medical equipment




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

35. Subjective	well­being	is	at	least	partly	temporary	in
response to the consumption of new and novel consumer goods. Pleasure has a stable component dependent on the accustomed consumption flows, but it also has a component that is dependent on change. Once the change occurs and the new consumer item becomes a part of the daily consumption bundle, the pleasure of novelty disappears and overall satisfaction returns to the original amount. A new kind of cereal at breakfast will temporarily add to our pleasure, but eventually our enjoyment of breakfast will return to its normal level. Also, as our incomes and material standards rise, so do our expected achievements. The purchase of a second automobile made possible by rising income increases our subjective well­being, but at the same time our aspirations rise and a second car becomes a part of our consumption expectations.  	 returns our subjective well­being to its normal amount. [3점]
① The realization that our income is losing its buying power
② Feeling	increasing	gap	between	our	income	and aspirations
③ Development in technology resulting from repeated use of new products
④ The ever­decreasing income due to the global economic crisis
⑤ The shrinkage in the gap between our expectations and realizations






3.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The dog’s natural tendency to memorize landmarks can actually hinder training. Younger dogs are so good at learning locations that they often spontaneously memorize their surroundings as part of the set of cues that tells them to do something. (A) , puppies  taught  the  verbal command “sit” in a training class may appear to have forgotten it as soon as they get home ― because, in addition to the command, they have spontaneously memorized as the relevant cue some feature of the room where the class was held and, in different surroundings, do not recognize the command. (B) , many dog trainers repeat a training exercise in a variety of places, in order to break such associations and isolate the intended cue, in this case, the verbal command alone.
(A) (B)
① For example	······	Therefore
② For example	······	Similarly
③ In contrast	······	Therefore
④ In contrast	······	Otherwise
⑤ In addition	······	Similarly

34.다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sitting motionless, leaning back against the trunk of a tall and shady pine tree, breathing in the fresh air, I was the sole visitor to my childhood beach. The early morning had already begun to warm up, as was normal for summer mornings in Bimini. The coarse white sand stuck to the back of my legs and thighs but provided a cool feeling. The gentle lapping sounds of the quiet ocean were fascinating as the tide lazily trickled onto the beach. Not a creature was stirring. No vehicles passed along the narrow hill street, which seemed to always have a constant stream of scooters and trucks racing by. No boats cruised the still sea. Even the seagulls were still resting! The beach at dawn provided the perfect place for meditation.
① calm and peaceful	② noisy and festive
③ tense and frightening ④ funny and humorous
⑤ gloomy and monotonous


[35 ~ 36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
39. As striking as the Greeks’ freedom and individuality is their sense of curiosity about the world. Aristotle thought
that curiosity was the uniquely defining property of human beings. ① St. Luke said of the Athenians of a later era: “They spend their time in nothing else but to tell or to hear some new thing.” ② The Greeks, far more than their contemporaries, speculated about the nature of the world they found themselves in and created models of it. ③ Slaves played an important role in Greek society and their status was dependent on how much labor they contributed to the society. ④ They constructed these models by categorizing objects and events and generating rules about them that were sufficiently precise for systematic description and explanation. ⑤ This characterized their advances in the fields of physics, astronomy, geometry, rational philosophy, and natural history.


40. The tongue map was based on German research published in 1901, but Edwin Boring, an influential Harvard psychologist, mistranslated it. ① What the original research had shown was that the human tongue has areas of relative
sensitivity to different tastes, but his translation stated that each could only be tasted in one zone. ② What is really mysterious about the tongue map is that it was the official truth for such a long time, even though it’s so easily disproved. ③ The sense of taste is related to the sense of smell and that is why we can’t detect tastes well when we have a runny nose. ④ It wasn’t until 1974 that another American scientist, Dr. Virginia Collings, reexamined the original theory. ⑤ She showed that, though sensitivity to the four main tastes did vary around the tongue, it was only to an insignificant degree.




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[37 ~ 38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
41. 

39.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한
곳은?








(A) I, on the other hand, concluded the poodle was the smartest of all the dogs tested. When confronted with this obstacle, he analyzed the situation and chose the easiest way of achieving the goal of getting to the other side of the wall ― he simply walked around it!
(B) The test involved having various breeds of dog negotiate a high wall in order to get to the other side. Dog after dog jumped over the wall. Finally, it was the standard poodle’s turn. The poodle stood there for a moment, as if to size up the obstacle in front of him.
(C) Then he casually walked around the wall and joined his fellow competitors on the other side of it. These so­called experts concluded that the poodle had failed the test ― he hadn’t possessed the intelligence to jump over it.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



42. 
　
Psychologists make the distinction between dispositions, or traits, and states, or momentary feelings. ( ① ) Think of some moments of happiness or despair you have experienced, such as when you won a prize or got an exciting job offer, or when somebody died. ( ② ) These experiences are states of happiness or sadness; they reflect the transient highs and lows of everyday life. ( ③ ) These are the emotional styles or ways of thinking that remain fairly steadfast across our lives. ( ④ ) Mary has “Mary­like” characteristics that remain fairly stable, just as Dave stays “Dave­like” under all circumstances. ( ⑤ ) Cheerful, happy babies tend to become adventurous, outgoing children who tend to become extroverted, sociable adults.
* transient: 일시적인




40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





(A) It often shows up as a spice in Asian cuisine. Aside from its unique flavor, turmeric may also prove a helpful treatment for people with arthritis, Alzheimer’s disease, and some forms of cancer.
(B) This healing art borrows many of its ideas from Hinduism, incorporating multiple therapies that include herbs, massage, and meditation. Ayurvedic practitioners may even go so far as to try a new food to heal. One medicinal food from Ayurveda may be familiar to you: turmeric.
(C) Although the research evidence isn’t yet conclusive, it certainly is highly recommended for these conditions. My own experience of using turmeric as an anti­inflammatory has been extraordinarily positive.
* anti­inflammatory: 소염제
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)











?


(A) (B)
① enhanced by	······	philosophy
② compared to	······	language
③ cherished by	······	language
④ compared to	······	technology
⑤ enhanced by	······	technology




8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)

(D)






41.위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Put Yourself in Another’s Shoes to Solve Conflict
② Compliment Your Employees Rather Than Criticize
③ How to Identify Your Company’s Top Performers
④ Building Teamwork Through Physical Activities
⑤ A Happy Family Life: A Shortcut to Success

42.위 글의 빈칸에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
① creativity	② cooperation	③ accuracy
④ diversity	⑤ endurance


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Tom was a strong­willed, competitive, hardworking businessman, who for thirty years ran a neighborhood hardware store. At the age of 58, poor health forced him to sell his business. His routine became one of turning on the television, pouring a bowl of chips, and spending the day in his favorite chair. His friend Don came by to see how (a) he was doing. He found his friend gaining weight, with a dark complexion and a very bad attitude.






43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C) ② (C) - (B) - (D) ③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C) ⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
4.밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45.위 글의 Tom에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 건강이 좋지 않아 58세에 가게를 팔았다.
② Robert라는 소년과 ‘hangman’ 게임을 했다.
③ 친구와 함께 병원 광대로 활동했다.
④ 병원 영양사로부터 더 좋은 식습관을 배웠다.
⑤ 병원을 방문하자는 친구의 요청에 마지못해 응했다.



2015학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역





37. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. I bought it for your birthday.
② I’ll go to the shop and get a refund.
③ You’re right. I’ll get some ornaments.
④ I’m sorry. I don’t feel like fishing now.
⑤ That’s true. I need to clean the fish tank.


38. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Oops! I forgot to return the book.
② I wish you could remember where it was.
③ That sounds great. Everything’s going well so far.
④ Probably. It’s inconsiderate to damage public property.
⑤ You should have met the deadline for the assignment.


39. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 할인 행사를 홍보하려고
② 쇼핑몰 상호 변경을 안내하려고
③ 공사로 인한 불편에 대해 사과하려고
④ 고객편의시설 이용을 권장하려고
⑤ 쇼핑몰 이전 계획을 공지하려고


40. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 스마트폰의 다양한 기능
② 정기적인 건강검진의 중요성
③ 스마트폰 중독이 야기하는 사회문제
④ 학습에 도움이 되는 신문 활용법
⑤ 스마트폰 사용 시 바른 자세


41. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 헬스 트레이너 ? 고객	② 영양사 ? 조리사
③  의상 디자이너 ? 모델	④ 운전 강사 ? 수강생
⑤ 스포츠 용품점 직원 ? 운동선수


42. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


43. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to wrap up a soccer ball	② to sponsor a child
③ to buy a birthday present	④ to help write a letter
⑤ to play with his brother

44. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 보고서 주제를 변경하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 온라인 자료의 신뢰성이 떨어져서
② 설문 조사 분석 시간이  오래 걸려서
③ 다른 학생의 연구주제와  중복되어서
④ 기한 내에 보고서를 제출할 수 없어서
⑤ 인터뷰 대상자를 충분히 구할 수 없어서

45. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 27	② $ 29	③ $ 37	④ $ 39	⑤ $ 42

46. 대화를 듣고, 2015 International Music Festival에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개막일	② 장소	③ 참가국 수
④ 공연 횟수	⑤ 입장료

47. Friendly Wheels에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 14년 전에 만들어진 동아리이다.
② 신입생만 가입할 수 있다.
③ 회원의 집 주소에 따라 3개 그룹으로 나뉜다.
④ 매달 모여 여행 경로에 대해 논의한다.
⑤ 교통비를 절약하여 환경단체에 기부한다.




2	영어 영역


48. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 공기청정기를 고르시오.
Air Purifier

①
②
③
④
⑤

49. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① You’re right. You need to find a new guitar teacher.
② Exactly! You should put your studies before your hobbies.
③ Of course, you should learn fancy skills as soon as possible.
④ Right, changing guitars will certainly improve your technique.
⑤ Yes. Keep practicing the essentials and you’ll be great someday.
50. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Sounds great. I’m going to let him know about it.
② For sure. He’s looking forward to his retirement.
③ Community centers should provide cultural programs.
④ Thanks for the offer. I desperately needed a job.
⑤ So, how did he overcome his depression?
51. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Sally가 Jonathan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sally:  	
① Don’t worry. I’ve already made the posters.
② Would you please pick me up on your way?
③ Leave it to me and I’ll get the posters for you.
④ Don’t forget to collect the posters on time.
⑤ Please stop being picky. Give me a break.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
52. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① typical symptoms of jet lag
② criteria for setting time zones
③ effective ways to avoid jet lag
④ the sun’s effects on melatonin production
⑤ how to ensure physical comfort during flights
53. 멜라토닌 생성을 높이는 식품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① pineapples	② oranges	③ potatoes
④ oats	⑤ barley


54. 
다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Piglet was suffering from the very essence of worry. His mind was filled with all manner of possible horrors and disasters. “Supposing that...,” “What if...,” and their variants are the hallmark of worry and anxiety. “Supposing a tree fell down, Pooh, when we were underneath it?” Of course it is possible. All kinds of dreadful things could happen today or tomorrow. But most of them are very unlikely. Once you allow yourself to worry about the unlikely, there is no end to worrying. Imagine looking back on a life of worry about the unlikely. It would be a life spoiled by anxiety about things, the vast majority of which never happened. Whenever you catch yourself worrying that something dreadful might happen, answer the Piglet in yourself with Pooh’s reply: “Supposing it didn’t.” Tackling existing problems is quite enough; do not waste energy and happiness on problems which do not exist.

① 일어날 것 같지 않은 일에 대해 걱정하지 마라.
② 불안을 해소하기 위해 근본적인 원인을 찾아라.
③ 과거에 얽매이지 말고 현재에 충실해야 한다.
④ 적당한 긴장감을 유지하여 일의 효율성을 높여라.
⑤ 문제 해결을 위해 여러 사람의 의견을 경청해야 한다.




55. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Both of us quiet, I put Lucy’s Mickey Mouse pajamas on her. Silent and somewhat still, she stood on the changing table as I held her close to zip her up. I breathed in the clean smell of her hair, feeling blonde curls tickle my chin. Suddenly, Lucy reached her arms around my neck, holding the back of my head tight between her arms. Little hands, little everything, pulled me to her, and she pressed her cheek to mine. It took only a moment to realize what was happening. “She’s hugging me for the very first time.” I wanted to yell for my husband, a neighbor, anyone to come see what my daughter was doing for the first time. We held each other for a few seconds, my daughter standing on the changing table dressed in her fuzzy red sleeper, her arms around my neck, her cheek pressed to my left shoulder. “Oh, Lucy,” I whispered, my words tight with tears. I never wanted to let go.

① lost and confused	② moved and delighted
③ relaxed and relieved	④ jealous and envious
⑤ nervous and frightened




영어 영역	3

[20~21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
56. Having positive relationships with peers can lead directly to resources and information that help students learn. By virtue of the fact that they are socially accepted, it is reasonable to assume that students who get along with their peers will also have access to peer resources that can promote the development of social and academic competencies. These resources can take the form of information and advice, modeled behavior, or specific experiences that facilitate learning. Teachers play the central pedagogical function of transmitting knowledge and training students in academic subject areas. However, students provide each other with valuable resources necessary to accomplish academic tasks. Students frequently clarify and interpret their teacher’s instructions concerning what they should be doing and how they should do it, provide mutual assistance in the form of volunteering substantive information and answering questions, and share various supplies such as pencils and paper.

① ways to prevent conflict among peers
② benefits of positive peer relationships in learning
③ side effects of strict school discipline on students
④ the importance of teachers’ detailed instructions
⑤ necessary components of effective teaching


57. A business incubator is, quite simply, a building that is divided into units of space, which are then leased to early?stage small businesses. The result is a collection of offices and small warehouses filled with businesses that have one thing in common: they are businesses in the early stages of development. Each of the businesses has problems and needs that are similar, and each is in need of a variety of help, ranging from technical assistance to shared business opportunities to a simple pat on the back. Business incubators are not intended to provide permanent homes to their client businesses but rather to provide them with a temporary nurturing environment, until such time as the business is financially healthy. Upon reaching more predictable profitability, the incubated business can then be expected to “graduate” and move on to a typical office or warehouse building.

① advantages of dividing labor
② the role of business incubators
③ financial advice for incubated businesses
④ how to make profits in a competitive market
⑤ the early?stage obstacles to small businesses

[22~23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
58. We have seen that individuals in many species are more likely to behave in an altruistic way when close relatives or kin will benefit than when only non?relatives will gain. This suggests that they can recognize which members of their species are kin and which are not. How does this occur? A key point is that individuals are by no means always accurate on this issue. For example, there are several species of birds in which the parents will ignore their own offspring if they are put outside their nest. However, if a cuckoo or other bird deposits an egg inside their nest, they will look after the bird when it hatches as if it were their own. These observations suggest that individuals tend to regard any other animal living in their home as kin even if there is no close physical resemblance. [3점]

① Why Altruism Influences the Social Behavior of Birds
② Nest Defence Is the Top Priority of Parent Birds
③ Recognizing Relatives Is the Key to Survival
④ Hatching Eggs: A Symbol of Aspiration
⑤ Kin Recognition: Is It Always Precise?



59. Maximilian Ringelmann, a French engineer, studied the performance of horses in 1913. He concluded that the power of two animals pulling a coach did not equal twice the power of a single horse. Surprised by this result, he extended his research to humans. He had several men pull a rope and measured the force applied by each individual. On average, if two people were pulling together, each invested just 93 percent of his individual strength, when three pulled together, it was 85 percent, and with eight people, just 49 percent. Science calls this the social loafing effect. It occurs when individual performance is not directly visible; it blends into the group effort. It occurs among rowers, but not in relay races, because here, individual contributions are evident. Social loafing is rational behavior: Why invest all of your energy when half will do ─ especially when this little shortcut goes unnoticed? Quite simply, social loafing is a form of cheating of which we are all guilty even if it takes place unconsciously, just as it does with the horses.

① Why Teams Are Lazy
② How Cooperation Maximizes  Efficiency
③ Where Individual Capability Stands Out
④ Group Competitions Make People More Alert
⑤ Social Loafing: Booster of Individual Performance




4	영어 영역


60. Jeannette Rankin에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Jeannette Rankin was born in Missoula, Montana in 1880. After attending public schools in Missoula, Jeannette
majored in biology at the University of Montana and graduated in 1902. Jeannette became the first woman elected to the U.S. Congress in 1916, before women nationwide had the right to vote. In 1917, she became one of 49 members of Congress who voted against entry into World War I. In 1941, she was the only legislator to vote against entry into World War II. The vote effectively ended her political career. In 1943, Jeannette went back to Montana rather than run for Congress again. She traveled worldwide, including to India and Turkey, promoting peace. Her long career was distinguished by her deep commitment to the country’s women, poor, and children. She continued to participate in antiwar movements actively by attending rallies and giving speeches into her 90’s.
① 대학에서 생물학을 전공했다.
② 미국에서 국회의원으로 선출된 최초의 여성이었다.
③ 국회의원 중 유일하게 제1차 세계대전 참전에 반대했다.
④ 1943년에 선거에 다시 출마하지 않고 Montana로 돌아갔다.
⑤ 90대의 나이까지 반전운동에 참가했다.
61. ICCEF 직원 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 정규직 직원을 선발한다.
② 박사 이상의 학위가 필요하다.
③ 재무 회계 분야에서 2년 이상의 근무경력이 필요하다.
④ 주요업무 중 하나는 직원 연수를 제공하는 것이다.
⑤ 지원서는 직접 방문하여 접수해야 한다.
62. 
Charity Photography Competition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 대회에 참여하여 장애인을 도울 수 있다.
② 사진의 주제는 평화이다.
③ 출품작의 용량은 최대 10MB까지 가능하다.
④ 사진의 캡션은 심사 기준에 포함되지 않는다.
⑤ 참가비  수납 정보는  이메일을 통해 안내된다.
63. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The above graph shows the total U.S. primary energy production in 2011 and the percentage each energy source accounts for. ① The pie chart shows five different energy sources: natural gas, coal, petroleum, nuclear, and renewables, with the last of these divided into six further sub?categories. ② The percentage of natural gas, coal, and petroleum in total takes up more than two thirds of the total
U.S. primary energy production. ③ The data also reveals that nuclear power generation ranks last and is close behind renewables with a marginal difference of one percentage point. ④ In the category of renewable energy, biofuels and other biomass percentages combined are larger than half of the renewable energy produced while hydroelectric energy is the single largest source. ⑤ Meanwhile, the two lowest renewables, geothermal and solar, share the same percentage of two percent each.




영어 영역	5

64. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　It has been proposed that sleep functions to conserve energy. This may be particularly relevant for warm?blooded animals (mammals and birds) that must expend a lot of energy to maintain a body temperature higher than ① that of their surroundings. Indeed, many small mammals living in cold climates, who lose heat easily by having an  unfavorable surface area to body weight ratio, ② tending to sleep a lot, often in insulating burrows.  Yet  sleep  does not appear ③ to have evolved only in warm?blooded animals. Some studies on reptiles and amphibians indicate that they also sleep, and there are now strong indications of a sleep
?like state in some invertebrates, such as crayfish, fruit flies, and honey bees. Also, though it is true that the overall use of energy is reduced during sleep, as ④ compared with the active waking state, there is almost as much reduction in energy use from just resting quietly. The additional energy conservation in going from the resting state to sleep
⑤ is minimal.	* invertebrate: 무척추동물

65. 밑줄 친 he가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? According to Dr. Paul Ekman, a pioneer of lying research at UC San Francisco, here is an example of how difficult it is for children to grasp the qualifying role of intent in telling a lie. On the way home from school on Tuesday, a dad promises his five?year?old son that ① he will take him to the baseball game on Saturday afternoon. When they get home, Dad learns from Mom that earlier in the day she had scheduled a swim lesson for Saturday afternoon and can’t change it. When they tell their son, ② he gets terribly upset, and the situation melts down. Why is the kid so upset? Dad didn’t know about the swim lesson. By the adult definition,
③ he did not lie. But by the kid definition, ④ he did lie. Any false statement ― regardless of intent or belief ― is a lie. Therefore, unwittingly, Dad has given his child the message that ⑤ he approves of breaking promises.
66. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　The dominance of conclusions over arguments is most pronounced where emotions are involved. The psychologist Paul Slovic has proposed a theory in which people let their likes and dislikes determine their beliefs about the world. Your political ① preference determines the arguments that you find compelling. If you like the current health policy, you believe its benefits are substantial and its costs ② more manageable than the costs of alternatives. If you are a hawk in your attitude toward other nations, you probably think they are relatively weak and likely to ③ submit to your country’s will. If you are a dove, you probably think they are strong and will not be easily persuaded. Your emotional attitude to such things as red meat, nuclear power, tattoos, or motorcycles ④ follows your beliefs about their benefits and their risks. If you ⑤ dislike any of these things, you probably believe that its risks are high and its benefits negligible.

[31~33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
67. Customers’ needs are usually expressed as high?level descriptions of the overall quality of a product or service. They are typically stated as adjectives and inherently do not imply a specific benefit to the customer. For instance, customers commonly say they want a product or service to be “reliable,” “effective,” “robust,” “dependable,” or “resilient.” Razor users may want the product to be “durable and strong.” Although these simple statements provide some indication as to what customers are looking for, they have one major drawback. They are   	                                                          and   present designers, developers, and engineers with the impossible task of figuring out just what customers really mean by “durable” or “strong.” If engineers faced the task of making a razor more “durable,” would they try to make the blade last longer, resist bending, or withstand constant moisture? Would any of these actions satisfy the customer’s true measure of “durable?” [3점]

① not appealing to female customers
② irrelevant to customers making purchases
③ preferable feedback for manufacturers only
④ ineffective in drawing consumers’ attention
⑤ imprecise statements open to interpretation




68. Many political scientists used to assume that people vote selfishly, choosing the candidate or policy that will benefit them the most. But decades of research on public opinion have led to the conclusion that self?interest is a weak predictor of policy preferences. Parents of children in public school are not more supportive of government aid to schools than other citizens, and young men subject to the draft are not more opposed to military escalation than men too old to be drafted. Rather, people care about their groups, whether those be racial, regional, or political. The political scientist Don Kinder summarizes the findings like this: “In matters of public opinion, citizens seem to be asking themselves not ‘What’s in it for me?’ but rather ‘What’s in it for my group?’” Political opinions 	. They’re like the array of bumper stickers people put on their cars showing the political causes, universities, and sports teams they support. Our politics is groupish, not selfish.

① continue to change over time
② correlate with parental concerns
③ serve as a means of self?display
④ function as badges of social membership
⑤ are just pie in the sky to ordinary people




6	영어 영역


69. In a study of complimenting behavior in American English, researchers discovered that one of the most striking features of compliments in American English is
 	. An initial examination of a large corpus revealed surprising repetitiveness in both the object of the compliments and the lexical items used to describe them. On closer investigation, it was discovered that regularities exist on all levels and that compliments are in fact formulas. We may categorize 80% of all compliments in the data as adjectival in that they depend on an adjective for their positive semantic value. In all, some seventy?two positive adjectives occur in the data. What is striking, however, is that of these seventy?two adjectives only five (nice, good, beautiful, pretty and great) are used with any frequency. While most adjectives occur only once or twice in the data, these five adjectives occur with such frequency that of all adjectival compliments in the corpus two thirds make use of only five adjectives. [3점]
* corpus: 언어 자료
① the foreign sounding qualities
② frequently misused adjectives
③ repetition of pitch patterns
④ an inherent ambiguity in meaning
⑤ the almost total lack of originality



70. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Once most Americans got their water only from the tap. Now they often buy their water in bottles. But bottled water costs 80 cents to $4.00 per gallon, while tap water costs only pennies per day. Is the extra expense worth it? Although the FDA sets regulations specifically for bottled water to ensure that	it	is	safe,	the	Environmental	Protection			Agency’s standards for tap water are actually higher. 			(A)			, bottled water is permitted to contain certain amounts of any bacteria. Tap water, in contrast, cannot contain any of the dangerous bacteria. Also, there are no federal filtration or disinfection requirements for bottled water, as there are for tap water. The chlorine used to treat tap water continues to kill harmful bacteria, while bottled water contains no such disinfectant to prevent bacterial growth. 	(B)					, tap water  is  actually  healthier  in  some  respects.	It		usually contains fluoride, along with other minerals ― such as calcium and iron ― that are beneficial to the body.
* chlorine: 염소 ** fluoride: 플루오린 화합물
(A) (B)
① For example …… Furthermore
② For example …… On the contrary
③ Nevertheless …… Consequently
④ Nevertheless      ……    Similarly
⑤ In other words    ……   However
71. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Despite all the increasingly user?friendly and popular technology, most studies published since the early 1990s confirm earlier conclusions: paper still has advantages over screens as a reading medium. ① Together, laboratory experiments, polls, and consumer reports indicate that digital devices prevent people from efficiently navigating long texts, which may subtly inhibit reading comprehension. ② Compared with paper, screens may also drain more of our mental resources while we are reading and make it a little harder to remember what we read when we are done. ③ Whether they realize it or not, people often approach computers and tablets with a state of mind less beneficial to learning than the one they bring to paper. ④ They are favoring digital devices, as reading digital texts for facts and fun becomes more common.
⑤ E?readers also fail to recreate certain tactile experiences of reading on paper, the absence of which some find unsettling.




[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
72. 


(A) A tree is tall relative to our average human size. In this way, categories of mind are defined by the body’s interaction with the environment. We call such features of conceptual categories “interactional properties.”
(B) As an example, take the conceptual category of TREE. How can the body play any role in our understanding what a tree is? For one thing, we understand a tree as being upright.
(C) This comes from how we experience our own bodies; namely, that we experience ourselves as being erect. For another, we see a tree as tall. The aspect of tallness only makes sense with respect to our standard evaluation of the body’s relative height. [3점]

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(D) Probably folks might like the idea of that, but they won’t necessarily bother to leave the house to go vote for it. People don’t care about traffic unless they are stuck in it and missing their children’s soccer practice.

(E) A few years ago I was involved in a campaign for a bill to fund an extra lane for a local freeway. The county wanted to run promotional ads for the bill promising to “improve our roads” and “reduce commute time.”

(F) A better approach was to run ads asking, “Wouldn’t it be nice to get to your child’s practice on time for once?” or, “Wouldn’t you like to get home early enough to have dinner with your family every night?” That helped voters picture exactly how the expanded freeway would improve their lives.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Parallel to new trends in the natural sciences and humanities, the realists focused on fact and perception, thus rejecting art that was based only on imaginary worlds. ( ① ) However, they never sought to simply imitate reality since that would have been easier with photography, which had just recently been invented. ( ② ) Instead, painters like Gustave  Courbet,  Adolf  von  Menzel,  Jean?Fran?ois  Millet,  and Honor? Daumier wanted to illustrate social conditions within their art. ( ③ ) In particular, artists chose motifs taken from industrial and rural worlds of life and labor. ( ④ ) Previously, these subjects had been handled at most in small, anecdotal genre paintings. ( ⑤ ) It portrayed an ordinary funeral and the rural mourners on a monumental scale, challenging the accepted norms of the art establishment at that time.

46. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　“We have two kinds of attention,” says Andrea Faber Taylor, an environmental psychologist at the University of Illinois. The first is the “directed attention” we call on for tasks that require focus, like driving or doing our taxes.   ( ① ) Directed attention tends to be tiring, however, and fatigue affects our ability to make good decisions and control destructive impulses. ( ② ) The best way to restore directed attention is to give it a rest by shifting to the second type, “involuntary attention,” which we display when we meditate. ( ③ ) For example, Roger Ulrich at Texas A&M University found that people who commuted along scenic roads recovered more quickly from stressful driving conditions than those who saw billboards, buildings, and parking lots. ( ④ ) Ulrich also looked at patients recovering from surgery. ( ⑤ ) The patients who could see trees from their hospital beds needed fewer painkillers and had shorter hospital stays than those who looked out on brick walls.










(A) (B)
① ruin	……	inaction
② ruin	……	nervousness
③ hinder	……	depression
④ raise	……	ambition
⑤ raise	……	satisfaction




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 





(C) 

(D) 






47. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Loneliness in the Company of Others
② The Two?edged Sword of Politeness
③ Everybody’s Friend Is Nobody’s Friend
④ Feeling Blue? It’s an Innate Human Trait
⑤ Interpretations of Politeness in Different Cultures
48. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① silence	② dialogue
③ curiosity	④ impatience
⑤ involvement


[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




49. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)	③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)	⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
50. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
51. 위 글의 Glenn에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 여덟 살 때 교실 난로에 불을 지피는 일을 했다.
② 화재로 형을 잃었다.
③ 사고로 오른쪽 다리가 왼쪽보다 거의 3인치 짧아졌다.
④ 1마일 경주에서 세계기록을 세웠다.
⑤ 부모님은 그의 다리 절단에 동의했다.








제 3 교시

2014학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
1




6. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.





1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It is their first wedding anniversary.
② I already visited the place yesterday.
③ They’re planning to buy new furniture.
④ I’m going to sing a song for the couple.
⑤ They started getting interested in fashion.


2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s okay. I’m not in a terrible hurry.
② Thanks. I’ll put a screen protector on it.
③ I told you. The screen is working all right.
④ I see. I’ll mail the letter as soon as possible.
⑤ Are you sure? The fee is higher than I expected.

3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장기간 외출 시 문단속을 당부하려고
② 게시판의 적극적인 활용을 권장하려고
③ 편의 시설 설치에 대한 의견을 수렴하려고
④ 입주자 대표 회의에 참석할 것을 독려하려고
⑤ 전등 교체를 위한 재방문 일정을 공지하려고

4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
① 빛의 색깔에 따른 다양한 정서적 반응
② 스마트 기기 중독과 집중력 사이의 관계
③ 늦은 밤 스마트 기기 사용으로 인한 수면 장애
④ 환경호르몬이 인체에 흡수되는 것을 막는 방법
⑤ 지속적인 수면 부족이 정신 건강에 미치는 영향


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 주름의 생성 과정
② 주름이 생기는 원인
③ 주름의 긍정적 기능
④ 주름을 예방하는 방법
⑤ 노화와 주름의 상관관계

① 프레젠테이션 시각 자료는 간결해야 한다.
② 큰 화면을 활용하여 프레젠테이션을 해야 한다.
③ 프레젠테이션 준비는 충분한 시간을 두고 해야 한다.
④ 장소를 고려하여 프레젠테이션 자료를 제작해야 한다.
⑤ 프레젠테이션은 주제에서 벗어나지 않도록 해야 한다.

7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 의사 - 신문 기자	② 서점 직원 - 고객
③ 작가 - 출판사 직원	④ 도서관 사서 ? 학생
⑤ 트레이너 - 운동선수

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 자전거 수리하기	② 인라인 스케이트 구입하기
③ 차고 물건 정리하기	④ 인라인 스케이트 청소하기
⑤ 자전거 상태 점검하기

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 셔츠를 구입하지 않은 이유를 고르시오.
① 품질이 좋지 않아서	② 원하는 치수가 없어서
③ 점원이 친절하지 않아서	④ 할인 판매를 하지 않아서
⑤ 디자인이 마음에 들지 않아서

10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90	② $150	③ $270	④ $300	⑤ $330

3 . Student of the Year Award에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 성적이 우수하고 리더십이 뛰어난 학생에게 수여한다.
② 지원자는 담임 교사의 추천을 받아야 한다.
③ 수상자는 다음 학기 전액 장학금을 받는다.
④ 시상식은 7월 25일에 시청에서 열린다.
⑤ 올해 시상식에는 시장이 참석할 예정이다.

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을 고르시오.
Dishwashers

①
②
③
④
⑤


	

4 영어 영역

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man: 	
① Never mind. I can take care of them for you.
② That’s true. Your cousin must be happy for you.
③ Of course. I have to take a business trip instead.
④ Don’t worry. I’ll soon get back to my normal routine.
⑤ I don’t buy it. Fish aren’t smart enough to recognize you.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman: 	

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① Would you help me achieve my dreams?
② Okay. Maybe I’ll buy a dream next time.
③ Does that mean we can interpret dreams?
④ Right. A lot of worries can lead to dreams.
⑤ It’s amazing that you remember your dreams.



15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ted가 Minhee에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ted: 	
① When do you want me to come over and help you?
② What is the Korean dish eaten at birthday parties?
③ How long have you lived here since you left Korea?
④ Could you tell me how to cook seaweed soup in detail?
⑤ Would my cousin like it if I made seaweed soup for her?


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① why we need to play team sports regularly
② the psychological benefits of playing sports
③ the role of sports in preventing heart disease
④ the importance of controlling emotions in sports
⑤ how to make your body healthier through sports

17. 언급된 스포츠가 아닌 것은?
① 수영	② 테니스	③ 축구
④ 농구	⑤ 배구





① 신설된 통학버스의 운행시간을 안내하려고
② 통학버스의 변경된 탑승 장소를 공지하려고
③ 등하교 시 적극적인 통학버스 이용을 권장하려고
④ 통학버스 정류장에 미리 나와 줄 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 통학버스 이용 만족도 조사에 참여하도록 독려하려고


19. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Child-rearing experts always caution parents not to tell children they’re bad when they misbehave, but rather to scold them for doing bad things. This concept applies to adults, as well. Good people occasionally do bad things, and bad people sometimes behave like angels. In looking for patterns, it is critical not to confuse occasional behavior or feelings with a more permanent personality trait or quality. If you’re considering rehiring someone who worked for you a few years earlier, you’d be wise to recall your past experience with him. But you’d be ill-advised to base the decision on a single occasion when he disagreed with you, unless you saw other behavior that indicated he was argumentative by nature. Isolated episodes don’t usually reveal a permanent state of mind. As you search for patterns, ask yourself whether the clue you are evaluating is just an isolated event.
① 단편적인 모습으로 그 사람을 판단해서는 안 된다.
② 시대의 변화에 따라 자녀 양육 방식도 달라져야 한다.
③ 옳고 그름을 판단하는 기준은 사람마다 다를 수 있다.
④ 성과보다는 성장 가능성을 고려하여 사람을 평가해야 한다.
⑤ 겉으로 드러난 자녀의 행동만으로 잘잘못을 따져서는 안 된다.




영어 영역	3

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Do you know what fear and doubt fear? Community. One of fear and doubt’s chief aims is to make you feel alone, like you’re the only one who feels a certain way. Fear wants to isolate you and put you on an island. As long as you keep your fear to yourself, no one can tell you the truth about it. No one can help you see what is really going on. No one can encourage you. So if you’re going to tell your voices, “Go away,” you’ve got to share them with other people. You’ve got to tell your close friends or family or a counselor about your voices. The exact person will be different for everyone, but never waste time trying to battle a voice alone. In some cases that voice of fear and doubt will have had a ten-year head start on you. Don’t go it alone.
① 두려움과 의심을 주변 사람과 나누어라.
② 새로운 도전에 대한 두려움과 의심을 버려라.
③ 외로움을 극복하려면 혼자 있는 시간을 즐겨라.
④ 자신의 목소리를 낮추고 함께하는 삶을 추구하라.
⑤ 어떤 상황에서도 진실을 말할 수 있는 용기를 가져라.











21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 When we experience life’s setbacks and feel down, something strange happens. In a kind of relationship reflex, our bodies automatically begin to send signals to attract loving care from another person. Our eyelids droop, our gazes turn downward, our shoulders drop, and our faces seem to say, “Doesn’t anyone see how sad I am? Doesn’t anyone want to help me?” Conversely, something within us causes us to be attracted to those who seem in distress and who are flashing their depression displays. We may respond by saying, “Are you okay?” or “You look like you’re carrying the burdens of the world on your back,” or “You look like you could use a shoulder to lean on.” When we are wilted and drooping, our sadness signals are received by others who are strangely attracted by our messages.
① How Our Bodies Express Our Excitement
② The Depression Display: A Strange Attractor
③ A Step Toward Ideal Relationships with Others
④ Body Language: A Way of Hiding Your Emotions
⑤ Facial Expressions: Indicators of a Health Disorder

2 . 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 When our minds are at ease, we’re more likely to direct the spotlight of attention inward, toward the stream of remote associations coming from the right hemisphere of our brains. In contrast, when we are diligently focused, our attention tends to be directed outward, toward the details of the problems we’re trying to solve. While this pattern of attention is necessary when solving problems analytically, it actually prevents us from detecting the connections that lead to creative insights. “That’s why so many insights happen during warm showers,” Subhra Bhattacharya, a well-known psychologist, says. “For many people, it’s the most relaxing part of the day.” It’s not until we’re being massaged by warm water, unable to check our e-mail, that we’re finally able to hear the quiet voices in the backs of our heads telling us about the insight.
① the disadvantages of inward directed attention
② the risk of being distracted by what arises in your mind
③ ways of staying focused on the problem solving process
④ positive effects of warm showers on emotional well-being
⑤ the importance of a relaxed state of mind for reaching insights





23. 다음 글의 (A) ~ (C)에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말을 바르게 짝지은 것은?
[3점]
　Entropy is a measure of disorder or randomness. Physicists have given a fully (A) qualitative / quantitative definition to entropy that allows one to describe something’s entropy by using a definite numerical value: larger numbers mean greater entropy, smaller numbers mean less entropy. Although the details are a little complicated, this number, roughly speaking, counts the possible rearrangements of the
(C) concepts / ingredients in a given physical system that leave its overall appearance intact. When your desk is neat and clean, almost any arrangement ― changing the order of the newspapers, books, or articles, moving the pens from their holders ― will upset its highly ordered organization. This accounts for its having low entropy. On the contrary, when your desk is a mess, numerous rearrangements of the newspapers, articles, and junk mail will leave it a mess and therefore will not (C) disturb / maintain its overall look. This accounts for its having high entropy.
(A) (B)	(C)
① qualitative …… concepts …… disturb
② qualitative …… ingredients …… maintain
③ quantitative ……  ingredients  …… maintain
④ quantitative …… concepts   …… maintain
⑤ quantitative …… ingredients …… disturb


	

4	영어 영역

24. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
 In some communities, music and performance have successfully transformed whole neighborhoods as ① profoundly as The Guggenheim Museum did in Bilbao. In Salvador, Brazil, musician Carlinhos Brown established several music and culture centers in formerly dangerous neighborhoods. In Candeal, ② where Brown was born, local kids were encouraged to join drum groups, sing, and stage performances. The kids, energized by these activities, ③ began to turn away from dealing drugs. Being a young criminal was no longer their only life option. Being musicians and playing together in a group looked like more fun and was more ④ satisfying. Little by little, the crime rate dropped in those neighborhoods; the hope returned. In another slum area, possibly inspired by Brown’s example, a culture center began to encourage the local kids to stage musical events, some of ⑤ them dramatized the tragedy that they were still recovering from.
25. 다음 글에 드러난 Cusi의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 At the opposite side of the valley, a narrow steep road led into the sloping hills. Along this road there now appeared two round glaring eyes. They would appear and disappear and appear again, each time rounder, more glaring, larger. Cusi was terrified. Itmustbeananimalfromanotherworld. The lights                                     came nearer and nearer with a strange noise and a still stranger smell. Then they disappeared completely. Chuto quietly laughed, looking down at Cusi’s set face. “Come,” he said to the boy. Cusi made himself follow the old Inca man across the terraces to the beginning of the road. “They call this thing a truck,” Chuto explained. “It won’t hurt you. It has wheels instead of feet. It has a motor instead of a heart. It has bad-smelling blood by the name of gasoline.” Cusi could finally catch his breath and feel more at ease.
① pleased	→ nervous	② hopeless	→ encouraged
③ indifferent → curious	④ interested → disappointed
⑤ frightened → relieved
26. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? The cottage of a poor man named Nicholas happened to stand in a place which was overgrown with wild bushes. ① He lay down under the shade of a hazel tree upon a hot day, about the time of harvest. A farmer passed close by ② him with a cart
heavily loaded with corn. With envious eyes Nicholas looked at the cart full of corn, and barely said “Good morning” to the farmer. ③ He, however, stopped, and said to Nicholas, “If from this land, which is your property, you would cultivate daily as many feet as you cover with your lazy body, you would reap every year much more corn than you see upon the cart here.” Nicholas paid attention to this advice. ④ He rooted up bushes, and worked upon the soil. It cost Nicholas not a single penny, and placed ⑤ him and his family in affluent circumstances.

27. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The graph above shows the best advertising sources that US consumers and marketers chose in October 2012 when they were permitted to select up to two choices. ① According to survey findings, more than 40 percent of both consumers and marketers rated Newspapers and TV as the best source for advertising. ② As for Family and Friends as an advertising source, the percentage gap between the preferences of consumers and marketers was biggest, at nine percent. ③ On the other hand, consumers and marketers showed only a one percent difference in their preference for Company websites.
④ Among all the advertising sources listed, News websites were chosen by a smaller proportion of marketers than consumers. ⑤ Marketers did not name Blogs as one of their top two choices, while four percent of consumers favored them as an advertising source.


28. Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 The Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road is something to behold in the Barren Lands of the North. It is the supply route to highly profitable diamond mines in the remote Canadian wilderness, stretching approximately six hundred kilometers. Approximately 80 percent of the ice road consists of frozen lakes. The road is built by a joint venture of mining companies operating in the area, and shared by many users, from exploration companies to native hunters of the region. This seasonal winter road is only open for eight to nine weeks each year, from February to the beginning of April depending on weather and the season’s load requirements. During the rest of the year, the mines can be reached only by air. Travel time on the ice road is generally around 14 hours and speed of vehicles is carefully controlled to protect the ice.
① 캐나다 다이아몬드 광산으로 연결된 물자 보급로이다.
② 대략 80퍼센트가 얼어붙은 호수로 이루어져 있다.
③ 지역 사냥꾼들의 이용이 통제된다.
④ 일 년에 8주에서 9주 정도 개방된다.
⑤ 얼음을 보호하기 위해 차량 속도가 제한된다.




영어 영역	5

29. 2014 Community Bird Day Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 텃새의 날을 기념하기 위한 행사이다.
② 오전과 오후로 나뉘어 진행된다.
③ 지역 주민 회관에서 진행될 예정이다.
④ 새를 주제로 한 다양한 단편 영화를 상영한다.
⑤ 조류 보호 단체를 후원하기 위해 입장료를 받는다.

[30 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
33. The saying that 	is captured in a study in which researchers wrote up a detailed description of a half inning of baseball and gave it to a group of baseball fanatics and a group of less enthusiastic fans to read. Afterward they tested how well their subjects could recall the half inning. The baseball fanatics structured their recollections around important game-related events, like runners advancing and runs scored. One almost got the impression they were reading off an internal scorecard. The less enthusiastic fans remembered fewer important facts about the game and were more likely to recount superficial details like the weather. Because they lacked a detailed internal representation of the game, they couldn’t process the information they were taking in. They didn’t know what was important and what was trivial. They couldn’t know what mattered. Without a conceptual framework in which to embed what they were learning, they were extremely forgetful. [3점]
① it takes knowledge to gain knowledge
② intelligence is much more than mere memory
③ imagination pushes the boundaries of knowledge
④ learning takes place everywhere and at all times
⑤ prejudice is an obstacle to processing information





34. Love is an attitude, an orientation of character which
 	, not toward one ‘object’ of love. If a person loves only one other person and is indifferent to the rest of his fellow men, his love is not love but a symbiotic attachment, or an enlarged egotism. Yet, most people believe that love is constituted by the object, not by the faculty. They believe that all that is necessary to find is the right object ― and that everything goes by itself afterward. This attitude can be compared to that of a man who wants to paint but who, instead of learning the art, claims that he has just to wait for the right object, and that he will paint beautifully when he finds it. If I truly love one person, I love all persons, I love the world, and I love life. If I can say to somebody else, “I love you,” I must be able to say, “I love in you everybody, I love through you the world, and I love in you also myself.” [3점]
* symbiotic: 공생의, 공생하는
① is closely related to intense attachment to oneself
② directs one’s resentment and anger toward oneself
③ has as its ultimate goal to add variety to a person’s life
④ primarily serves to guide an individual toward a specific goal
⑤ determines the relatedness of a person to the world as a whole



6	영어 영역

35. A great example of how potent a force your unconscious can be was detailed by researchers in a 2006 paper published in the journal Science. They conducted a study in which people were asked to remember a terrible sin from their past, something they had done which was unethical. The researchers asked them to describe how the memory made them feel. They then offered half of the participants the opportunity to wash their hands. At the end of the study, they asked subjects if they would be willing to take part in later research for no pay as a favor to a desperate graduate student. Those who did not wash their hands agreed to help 74 percent of the time, but those who did wash agreed only 41 percent of the time. According to the researchers, one group had unconsciously 	and felt less of a need to pay the debts of their sins. The people in the study connected their hand washing with all the ideas of cleanliness associated with the act, and then those associations influenced their behavior.
① lost their spontaneity
② helped people in need
③ washed away their guilt
④ weakened their confidence
⑤ forgotten their participation






3 . Some people believe that you can’t change human nature, and thus they see the idea of an evolving human consciousness as no more than unwarranted idealism. Yet, what is human nature? The dictionary defines nature as the inherent character or basic constitution of a person or thing ? its essence. But does the inherent character and essence of a person ever change? We can gain insight into this key issue by asking an analogous question: Does the inherent character of a seed change when it grows into a tree? Not at all. The potential for becoming a tree was always resident within the seed. When a seed grows into a tree, it represents only a change in the degree to which its potential, always inherent in its original nature, is realized. Similarly, human nature does not change; yet, like the seed with the potential of becoming a tree, human nature is 	. We human beings can grow from a primitive to an enlightened condition without a change in our basic human nature. [3점]
① not only an inherent trait but a social product
② not a static thing but a spectrum of potentials
③ fertile soil with the potential to nurture creativity
④ a stepping stone as well as a handicap to the future
⑤ the result of interaction between mankind and nature
37. 
The ability to see the situation as the other side sees it, as difficult as it may be, is one of the most important skills a negotiator can possess. It is not enough to know that they see things differently. If you want to influence them, you also need to understand empathetically the power of their point of view and to feel the emotional force with which they believe in it. It is not enough to study them  like beetles under a microscope; you need to know
 	. To accomplish this task you should be prepared to withhold judgment for a while as you “try on” their views. They may well believe that their views are right as strongly as you believe yours are. You may see on the table a glass half full of cool water. Your spouse may see a dirty, half-empty glass about to cause a mark on the expensive furniture.
① what it feels like to be a beetle
② how scientists use the equipment
③ where you can find the right beetle
④ why a beetle is an important specimen
⑤ when an awkward situation takes place




[35 ~ 36] 다음 글의 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말을 바르게 짝지은 것을 고르시오.
38. Costs vary not only with the volume of output, and to varying degrees from one industry to another, they also vary according  to the  extent  to  which  existing   (A)    is being used. When an airplane with 200 seats is about to take off with 180 passengers on board, the cost of letting 20 standby passengers get on the flight is negligible. That is one reason for radically different prices being charged to people flying on the same plane. Some passengers bought guaranteed reservations and others essentially bought a chance of getting on board as standbys. Different levels of probability have different costs in airline tickets, as elsewhere. The passengers themselves also differ in how important it is for them to be at a particular place at a particular time. Those on urgent business may want a guaranteed reservation, even at a higher price, while others may be  in  a position where (B) money  is  more important than being on one particular flight rather than another. [3점]
(A) (B)
① capacity
……
saving
② property
……
raising
③ equipment
……
investing
④ technology
……
saving
⑤ information
……
raising




영어 영역	7

39. A snack with the label “99% natural” seems more appealing than it would if labeled “1% unnatural.” A frozen dinner labeled “75% fat free” would sell better than it would with the label “25% fat.” The less appealing labeling option is just as accurate as the more appealing option. It also makes us reflect more about what we might be eating. (A) , bets sound less appealing when framed in terms of the chances of losing or the amount of money one might lose, rather than the chances of winning or the amount of money one would win. Medical procedures may sound scarier when presented in terms of the risk of dying, rather than the likelihood of coming through unharmed. (B) , it is a useful exercise to recompute losses in terms of gains or gains in terms of losses.
(A) (B)
① Similarly …… Therefore
② Similarly …… Nevertheless
③ Instead …… In addition
④ However …… For example
⑤ However …… In other words

37. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Like any other organ or system in the body, bone becomes stronger when it is stressed regularly, and it becomes weak when it is not used enough. ① In this case, “stressed” means loaded through impact and tension, as occurs during running.
② For the best explanation of bones becoming weak, take a look at astronauts. ③ Their bones are unloaded and not used much during lengthy stays in the zero-gravity environment of space. ④ As people age, the body starts to reabsorb calcium from the bones, leading to loss of bone mass. ⑤ When they arrive back on Earth, their bones are often so weak that they can barely support the astronaut’s body weight.

38. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

39. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

(E) However, the number of differently labeled segments we use varies. Some languages only distinguish between two basic colors, black and white. Others add green, yellow, blue, and brown.
(F) Language has a significant effect on how we “see” colors
― more precisely, on how we divide up and label different parts of the visible spectrum. Our eyes register roughly the same range of light between the aptly named infrared and ultraviolet.
(G) This sort of different color categorization is nicely illustrated by the word “grue.” Psychologists use it to describe languages that make no distinction between green and blue.
① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





 If leadership is the ability to create change your organization believes in, and the market demands change, then the market demands leaders, not managers. ( ① ) Managers manage by using the authority the factory gives them, and you listen to your manager to avoid losing your job. ( ② ) A manager can’t make change because that’s not his job; his job is to complete tasks assigned to him by someone else in the factory. ( ③ ) They use passion and ideas to lead people, as opposed to using threats and bureaucracy to manage them. ( ④ ) Leaders must become aware of how the organization works, because this awareness allows them to change it. ( ⑤ ) Leadership doesn’t always start at the top, but it always manages to affect the folks at the top.



?


(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① solitary	…… violence	② solitary …… cooperation
③ positive	…… conflict	④ positive …… bonding
⑤ incomplete …… attraction




8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



(B)



(C)
(H) 






41. 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① Work Less: You’ll Get More Done
② Take a Chance, Make Your Choice
③ How Specific Should Your Plans Be?
④ How to Tune in to Your Academic Needs
⑤ Daily Planning: The Key to Academic Success

42. 밑줄 친 빈칸에 들어갈 가장 적절한 말은?
① demands	② contacts	③ adjustments
④ contributions	⑤ appointments

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞도록 바르게 배열한 것은?
① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)
4 . (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 다른 하나는?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)
45. John에 대한 내용으로 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 멘토 프로그램 참여를 제안 받았다.
② 소속 팀이 선수권 대회에서 우승을 차지했다.
③ Randy를 소속 팀의 주장으로 임명해 줄 것을 요청했다.
④ Randy를 도서관에 데려가서 개인지도를 했다.
⑤ 전액 체육 특기생 장학금을 받고 대학에 진학했다.




2014학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 - 미술 교사	② 미술 치료사 - 학부모
③ 기자 - 미술 평론가	④ 미술 용품점 주인 - 화가
⑤ 관람객 - 미술관 직원

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I know. It’s not easy to make good spaghetti.
② Exactly. I’ll do something to reduce food waste.
③ Yes. Making a shopping list helps to save money.
④ Not at all. I’m pretty sure it won’t last for a week.
⑤ You’re right. We should have family meals more often.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll help you find an interesting topic.
② I’m glad that you came to my art presentation.
③ You’ll learn a lot about art through the presentation.
④ Don’t worry. Your presentation was not boring at all.
⑤ I have no idea why the presentation schedule was changed.



3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 새로운 헬스 기구의 사용법을 설명하려고
② 교내 헬스장에서 지켜야 할 예절을 강조하려고
③ 체력 증진을 위한 교내 헬스장 이용을 독려하려고
④ 헬스장 이용 시 준비 운동을 할 것을 당부하려고
⑤ 교내 헬스장 보수 공사 일정을 공지하려고



4. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 휴대용 컴퓨터의 손상 방지책
② 휴대용 컴퓨터 보안 관리의 필요성
③ 휴대용 컴퓨터의 주변 기기 관리 요령
④ 휴대용 컴퓨터 사용 증가로 인한 문제점
⑤ 휴대용 컴퓨터 종류에 따른 용도와 특징



5. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학교 도서관의 시설 확충이 시급하다.
② 학생들의 도서관 이용을 장려해야 한다.
③ 학교 도서관에 최신 도서를 구비해야 한다.
④ 다양한 분야의 책을 균형 있게 읽어야 한다.
⑤ 올바른 정보 습득을 위한 교육을 강화해야 한다.


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 해야 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 샘플 상품 요청하기	② 계약 조건 확인하기
③ 시장 수요 조사하기	④ 출장 일정 점검하기
⑤ 출장 보고서 작성하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 이사 가려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 직장을 옮겨서	② 침실이 더 많이 필요해서
③ 주차 공간이 협소해서	④ 난방비가 많이 나와서
⑤ 자녀의 통학 거리가 멀어서


9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



10.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $800	② $950	③ $1,300	④ $1,450	⑤ $2,150


1.다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을 고르시오.

White Beach Aquarium: Daily Programs


①
②
③
④
⑤




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.2014 Photography Seminar에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지
않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 6월 1일부터 6일 동안 열리는 행사이다.
② 100명이 넘는 강사가 다양한 전문 분야를 다룰 예정이다.
③ 최신 사진 장비에 대한 설명이 있을 것이다.
④ 전화와 이메일을 통해 예약이 가능하다.
⑤ 사진 전공 학생에게는 할인 혜택이 주어진다.

13.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① No thanks. We have cancelled the bazaar.
② Yes, the bazaar was successful thanks to you.
③ Sorry, but I’m too busy to volunteer at the bazaar.
④ Please help me become the director of the school bazaar.
⑤ It’ll be nice of you to ask other teachers for participation.

14.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I’m sorry to hear you have so much stress.
② It must be difficult to work as an office worker.
③ It’s impressive that you keep challenging yourself.
④ I don’t know why you want to start a new business.
⑤ You need to spend less money at a fancy restaurant.

15.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Benny가  운전자에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Benny: Excuse me.  	
① I’m looking for the entrance to the mall.
② I’ve been waiting to take this parking space.
③ Please help me carry this grocery to my car.
④ You should turn off your blinkers after parking.
⑤ I’m afraid there’s something wrong with your tire.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① factors causing movie mistakes
② expansion of the movie industry
③ using movies for learning history
④ strategies for casting good actors
⑤ history of commercial film-making

17.영화 제작과 관련하여 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 예산	② 촬영지	③ 의상
④ 특수 효과	⑤ 소품

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 빈번한 쓰레기 미수거에 대해 항의하려고
② 구입한 물품의 배송 지연에 대해 문의하려고
③ 재활용 쓰레기 수거 일정의 변경을 요청하려고
④ 지역 환경 보호 운동을 선도한 것에 대해 감사하려고
⑤ 종이 재활용 프로그램 운영에 필요한 물품 기부를 부탁하려고







19.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Mr. Aryeh noticed a young boy coming to school in old worn-out shoes. Clearly ① he needed a new pair, but Mr. Aryeh also knew that the boy’s father, a proud man, would be humiliated and offended if ② his son were treated as a charity case and given a pair. How does a person with moral imagination provide a boy with shoes, while not paining his father’s soul? During a morning recess break, Mr. Aryeh called the boy to his office because, he said, he needed to test ③ him on his English proficiency. He asked the boy several questions, well within the youth’s grasp. “Wonderful!” Mr. Aryeh said when the boy answered correctly. He gave
④ the youngster two notes: one to be brought to a local shoemaker, with instructions to give the boy a good pair of shoes, for which Mr. Aryeh would pay; the second, a note to the boy’s father telling ⑤ him about the “prize” his son had won.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Most people get trapped in their optimistic biases, so they tend to listen to positive feedback and ignore negative feedback. Although this may help them come across as confident to others, in any area of competence (e.g., education, business, sports or performing arts) achievement is 10% performance and 90% preparation. Thus, the more aware you are of your weaknesses, the better prepared you will be. Low self-confidence may turn you into a pessimist, but when pessimism teams up with ambition it often produces outstanding performance. To be the very best at anything, you will need to be your harshest critic, and that is almost impossible when your starting point is high self-confidence. Exceptional achievers always experience low levels of confidence and self-confidence, but they train hard and practice continually until they reach an acceptable level of competence.
① Never Reveal Your Weaknesses
② Negative Comments Are Harmful
③ The Risk of Ambition Without Effort
④ The Less Confident Are More Successful
⑤ High Self-Confidence Leads to Better Achievement










21.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A painter I know can’t do anything in her studio without rock’n’roll pounding out of the speakers. Turning it on turns on a switch inside her. The beat gets her going. It’s the metronome for her creative life. A writer friend can only write outside. He can’t stand the thought of being tied indoors to his word processor while a “great day” is unfolding outside. So he carries his coffee mug out to work in the warmth of an open porch in his backyard. Mystically, he now believes he is missing nothing. In the end, there is no one ideal condition for creativity. What works for one person is useless for another. The only criterion is this: Make it easy on yourself. Find a working environment where the prospect of wrestling with your muse doesn’t scare you, doesn’t shut you down. It should make you want to be there, and once you find it, stick with it.
* muse: (예술적) 영감을 주는 신
① 집중적인 노력은 창의력 향상의 바탕이 된다.
② 음악 감상을 통해 창조적 영감을 얻을 수 있다.
③ 창작 활동을 위해 일과 휴식의 균형이 필요하다.
④ 창조적 활동을 위한 각자에게 맞는 작업 환경이 있다.
⑤ 창조적 영감은 예상치 않은 순간에 떠오르기도 한다.

2.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Our essentially subtropical body isn’t well suited to life in the Arctic because we don’t have the fur of polar bears or the thick, insulating fat of sea mammals. But we can make fur clothing, shelters to contain warmth, and weapons with which to hunt and defend ourselves. These items are good examples of cultural adaptation, which show how culture is used to survive the natural world. Keep in mind, though, that people must also survive the cultural world they inhabit, and that is just as important. For example, if you don’t greet your neighbors the right way, you may cause bad feelings; in the same way, your grandfather may not appreciate your elaborate, back-slapping handshake the way your buddy does. So although culture does help you survive the natural world, it also tells you how to survive the cultural world of social interactions.
① ways to improve biological adaptation
② the use of culture for human survival
③ genetic factors to reduce human adaptability
④ the influence of instruction on human survival
⑤ the role of communication in social interactions







23.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적 절한 것은?
　When discussing the animal kingdom, each creature belongs to a species scale of generalists to specialists. Specialist creatures like the koala bear can only survive on an extremely (A) limited / variable set of conditions: diet (eucalyptus), climate (warm), environment (trees). Generalists, on the other hand (think mice), are able to survive just about anywhere. They can (B) dread / withstand heat and cold, eat your organic breakfast cereal or seeds and berries in the wild. So, specialist species thrive only when conditions are perfect. They serve a very specific purpose within their particular ecosystem and are good at navigating it. However, should those conditions change ? as a result of nature or, more commonly, an outside force ? specialist species often become (C) extinct / widespread . In contrast, mice can move from spot to spot on the globe, adapt to different cultures, diets and weather systems. And most importantly, they stay alive.
(B) (B)	(C)
① limited	dread	extinct
② limited	withstand	widespread
③ limited	withstand	extinct
④ variable	withstand	widespread
⑤ variable	dread	widespread




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

24.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
　In the 1970s, when schools began allowing students to use portable calculators, many parents ① objected. They worried that a reliance on the machines would weaken their children’s grasp of mathematical concepts. The fears, subsequent studies showed, were largely ② unneeded. No longer forced to spend a lot of time on routine calculations, many students gained a deeper understanding of the principles underlying their exercises. Today, the story of the calculator is often used to support the argument that our growing dependence on online databases is ③ disadvantageous. In freeing us from the work of remembering, it’s said, the Web allows us to devote more time to creative thought. The pocket calculator
④ relieved the pressure on our working memory, letting us use that critical short-term store for more abstract reasoning. The calculator, a powerful but highly specialized tool, turned out to be an ⑤ aid to our working memory.



25.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　I remember one of the smartest I.T. executives ① for whom I ever worked strongly resisting the movement to measure programmer productivity that was popular at the time. He was fond of saying that the biggest problem with managing computer programmers is that you can never tell ② whether they are working by looking at them. Picture two programmers working side by side. One is leaning back in his chair with his eyes ③ closed and his feet on the desk. The other is working hard, typing code into his computer. The one with his feet up could be thinking, and the other one may be too busy typing
④ to give it enough thought. In the end, the busy typist could well produce ten times as many lines of code as the thinker, which contain twice as many new problems as the thinker’s. Unfortunately, most of the productivity measurement schemes I have encountered ⑤ measuring effort or apparent activity. They would reward him and punish his thoughtful neighbor.



26.San Miniato에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　San Miniato is a town of about 26,000 that sits atop three hills in the Arno river valley in Tuscany, Italy. The town’s history is deeply rooted in its function as an important stop along the trading route between France and Italy. To protect its historic building character, the city has set detailed criteria for the installation of signs, plaques, and posters and has revised its street signs. To protect views of the town and to limit visual intrusions, the city has made strict regulations about the construction of cell phone towers. To accommodate visitors and tourists and not intrude on the urban layout and design, the town has built an underground parking lot with an elevator to the city center.

① Arno강 유역의 구릉지에 위치한다.
② 프랑스와 이탈리아의 교역로에 위치한 중요한 기착지였다.
③ 건물의 역사성 보존을 위해 간판 설치의 세부 기준을 정했다.
④ 도시 미관을 위해 이동 전화 송신탑 설치에 관한 엄격한 규정 을 마련했다.
⑤ 도심에 지하 주차장을 건설하려는 계획을 취소했다.






27.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한 곳은?

　Forests have always had a role in human society. ( ① ) They have been a source of building timber and firewood, of wild game and foods like mushrooms. ( ② ) During the Middle Ages, especially in parts of Northern Europe, they developed a reputation for being places of darkness and fear, the home of evil spirits and wild beasts. ( ③ ) In Germany you might have been attacked by werewolves or a semi-human Wild Man, a kind of ogre covered with coarse hair who ate children. ( ④ ) Anglo-Saxon folk tales, such as the eighth-century Beowulf, frequently set the action in scary forests, a legacy inherited by the stories of Tolkien, in which friendly hobbits are extremely frightened at the thought of having to pass through the haunted Fangorn Forest. ( ⑤ ) Out of this medieval vision comes our word ‘savage’, derived from silva, meaning a wood.






28.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Fascinated by how easily fish slip through water, scientists and sportswear designers alike have examined fish skins at the molecular level to determine why they have less friction than humans. ① Researchers were surprised to discover that shark skin, which is rough enough to be used as sandpaper when dried, is one of the animal skins with the least friction. ② Shark skin is covered by small, V-shaped bumps, made from the same material as the sharks’ teeth. ③ Shark fin is also incorrectly perceived by some as having high nutritional value, as well as cancer-fighting abilities. ④ The rough surface actually reduces drag as the shark glides through the ocean, because the bumps efficiently channel the water away from the surface. ⑤ Copied in fabric form, a shark skin-like system woven into a textile’s structure gives the fabric a hydrodynamic advantage.
* hydrodynamic: 유체 역학의




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
32. 
Bikes4Hope Support Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하지 않는 것은?


















　The graph above shows the trend of blood donation in Korea from 2005 to 2009, in terms of the number of blood donors and blood donation rates. ① The blood donation rate was 5.3% in 2009, which was the highest during the given period. ② The blood donation rate was the same both in 2005 and in 2006, and it showed constant increase afterward. ③ The number of group blood donors was the highest in 2005, and the number of individual blood donors was the highest in 2009. ④ The year 2005 was the only year when the number of group blood donors was larger than that of individual blood donors. ⑤ The difference between the number of group donors and that of individual donors was the largest in 2009.


30.주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A) After a few debates that left both of them feeling frustrated, Gabe decided to change strategy, and announced, “Okay, Colin, we’ll try it your way for three days. But if you’re late for school any of those days, then we go back to the old system.”
(B) For example, he protested Gabe’s policy that he get fully dressed before coming down to breakfast. Gabe didn’t particularly care what Colin wore at the breakfast table, but he worried that if Colin didn’t dress first, he’d wind up late for school. “But I’m more comfortable in my pajamas!” Colin argued.
(C) Colin, amazed by the change in response, aced the trial run. He wore his pajamas and stayed punctual. As a result, the new practice stuck, and both sides are happier with the outcome.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



① 아프리카로 자전거를 보내기 위한 기금 마련 행사이다.
② 3월 27일에 4시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 음악 공연과 마술 공연이 있다.
④ 입장권은 당일 현장에서만 판매한다.
⑤ 어른을 동반한 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.





32.다음 글에 드러난 Hogan의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Hogan had already been walking for hours along the sand track. He had drunk the last remaining drop of water an hour before. His feet came down regularly one in front of the other, sending up little clouds of dust. The dunes stretched as far as the eye could see, motionless, on either side of the track. Nothing was left but the dazzling sand with its millions of tiny broken grains, and dry stones that crumbled away in layers. No trucks passed. No aircraft ever appeared in the immense sky. The nothingness was so great that it could not even be called solitude any longer. It was like floating on the ocean, thousands of miles from land, while tiny waves sweep forward in ripples.
① satisfied and grateful	② relaxed and refreshed
③ hopeless and abandoned	④ excited and anticipating
⑤ ashamed and embarrassed




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[33 ~ 37] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
3.Languages evolve differences because different groups of people independently develop different words and different
pronunciations over the course of time. But the question remains why those diverged languages don’t merge again when formerly separated people spread out and re-contact each other at speech boundaries. For instance, at the modern boundary between Germany and Poland, there are Polish villages near German villages, but the villagers still speak a local variety of either German or of Polish, rather than a mix of German and Polish. Why is that so? Probably the main disadvantage of speaking a mixed language involves a basic function of human language: as soon as you start to speak to someone else, your language serves as an instantly recognizable badge of your 	. It’s much easier for wartime spies to wear the enemy’s uniform than to imitate convincingly the enemy’s language and pronunciation. People who speak your language are your people, whereas someone speaking a different language is apt to be regarded as a potentially dangerous stranger.
① artistic taste
② group identity
③ intellectual power
④ personal character
⑤ educational background






40. Our craving for 	is illustrated by a study of religious Israeli women, carried out by anthropologists  Richard Sosis and W.  Penn Handwerker.
During the 2006 Lebanon War the town of Tzfat and its environs in the Galilee region of northern Israel were hit by dozens of rockets daily. Although siren warnings alerted Tzfat residents to protect their own lives by taking refuge in bomb shelters, they could do nothing to protect their houses. Realistically, that threat from the rockets was unpredictable and uncontrollable. Nevertheless, about two-thirds of the women interviewed by Sosis and Handwerker recited psalms every day to cope with the stress of the rocket attacks. When they were asked why they did so, a common reply was that they felt compelled “to do something” as opposed to doing nothing at all. Although reciting psalms does not actually deflect rockets, it did provide the women with a sense of control as they took action in their own way.	* deflect: 빗나가게 하다
① knowledge of the future
② relief from feeling helpless
③ exploring the unknown world
④ being accepted by our peers
⑤ freedom from social conventions
41. 
Risk	management	professionals	look	in	the	past	for
information on the so-called worst-case scenario and use it to estimate future risks ― this method is called “stress testing.” They take the worst historical recession, the worst war, or the worst point in unemployment as an exact estimate for the worst future outcome. But they never notice the following inconsistency: this so-called worst-case event, when it happened, exceeded the worst case at the time. I have  called  this  mental  defect  the  Lucretius  problem,  after  the Latin poetic philosopher who wrote that the fool believes that the tallest mountain in the world will be equal to the tallest one he has observed. The same can be seen in the Fukushima nuclear reactor, which experienced a huge failure in 2011 when a tsunami struck. It had been built to endure the worst past historical earthquake, with the builders not imagining much worse ? and not thinking that the worst past event had to be a surprise, as it 	. [3점]
① had no precedent
② matched their prediction
③ led to better preparation
④ repeated itself over time
⑤ came earlier than expected








42. Think of how you developed your style of using the brakes on your car. As you were mastering the skill of
taking curves, you gradually learned when to let go of the accelerator and when and how hard to use the brakes. Curves differ, and the variability you experienced while learning ensures that you are now ready to brake at the right time and strength for any curve you encounter. The conditions for learning this skill are ideal, because you receive immediate and unambiguous feedback every time you go around a bend: the mild reward of a comfortable turn or the mild punishment of some difficulty in handling the car if you brake either too hard or not quite hard enough. The situations that face a harbor pilot maneuvering large ships are no less regular, but skill is much more difficult to acquire by sheer experience because of the long delay between actions and their noticeable outcomes. Whether professionals have a chance to develop intuitive expertise depends essentially on 	, as well as on sufficient opportunity to practice. [3점]
① the ability to control emotions
② the assistance from instructors
③ the discovery of hidden talents
④ the desire to beat the opponents
⑤ the quality and speed of feedback




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

43. The tight bonds we form with our tools go both ways.
Even as our technologies become extensions of ourselves, we become extensions of our technologies. When the carpenter takes his hammer into his hand, he can use that hand to do only what a hammer can do. The hand becomes an implement for pounding and pulling nails. When the soldier puts the binoculars to his eyes, he can see only what the lenses allow him to see. His field of view lengthens, but he becomes blind to what’s nearby. Nietzsche’s experience with his typewriter provides a particularly good illustration of the way 	. Not only did the philosopher come to imagine that his typewriter was “a thing like me”; he also sensed that he was becoming a thing like it, that his typewriter was shaping his thoughts. [3점]
① technologies exert their influence on us
② tools are refined and developed
③ we overcome our weaknesses
④ one invention builds on another
⑤ we put our passion into meaningful purposes











[38 ~ 39] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
44. Indeed, confusing people a little bit is beneficial ― it is good for you and good for them. For example, imagine
someone extremely punctual who comes home at exactly six o’clock every day for fifteen years. You can use his arrival to set your watch. The fellow will cause his family anxiety if he is barely a few minutes late. Someone with a slightly more  (A)   schedule, with, say, a half-hour variation, won’t do so. For similar reasons, stability is not good for the economy: firms become very weak during long periods of steady success without failure, and hidden vulnerabilities accumulate silently under the surface ― so delaying crises is not a very good idea. Likewise, (B)   of ‘ups and downs’ in the market causes hidden risks to accumulate quietly. The longer one goes without a market trauma, the worse the damage when a real crisis occurs.
45. 
My suggestion is to understand and make use of the
changes in people’s strengths and weaknesses as they grow older. We can say that useful attributes tending to decrease with age include ambition, desire to compete, physical strength and endurance, and capacity for sustained mental concentration. (A) ,  useful  attributes  tending  to  increase with age include experience of one’s field, understanding of people and relationships, and ability to help other people without one’s own ego getting in the way. These shifts in strengths result in many older workers choosing to devote more of their efforts to supervising, administering, advising, and teaching. (B) , my farmer friends in their 80s spend less time on horseback and on tractors, more time making strategic decisions about the business of farming; my older lawyer friends spend less time in court, more time mentoring younger lawyers.
(A) (B)
① In other words For instance
② In other words Instead
③ Additionally	In contrast
④ Conversely	In contrast
⑤ Conversely	For instance

40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

?

* vulnerability: 취약성
(A)	(B)

①
restricted
frequency


②
unpredictable
expectation
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
③
unpredictable
absence
① suspend
prosperity
② suspend
competition
④
⑤
consistent
consistent
duration
experience
③ extend
⑤ stimulate
prosperity
competition
④ extend
threat



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[41 ∼ 43] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


(B)
　The embarrassed boy ran up to (b) his room, slammed the door, and refused to come down to the party. But a little later his mother came up to fetch him. When she brought him downstairs, he saw his grandmother proudly walking around the room with a large bowl filled with a variety of beautiful fruits and, in the middle, the polished football he had brought home. When a guest asked his grandmother to explain what a football was doing in the middle of her fruit bowl, she told (c) him about the gift from her grandson and added, “From a child is beautiful, anything.”

42.밑줄  친  (a)∼(e)  중에서  가리키는  대상이  나머지  넷과  다른
것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

43.위 글의 Allen Sherman에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 어머니가 부르러 온 후에야 파티에 참석했다.
② 과일 그릇 한가운데 놓여 있는 축구공을 보았다.
③ 할머니에게 드릴 축구공을 깨끗이 닦았다.
④ 축구공을 발견한 어머니로부터 칭찬을 들었다.
⑤ 가장 좋은 장난감들을 주고 축구공을 얻었다.

[44 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.


(C)


(D)
　The slamming door reminded the now embarrassed Sherman of a door that he had slammed twenty-five years earlier.  One morning he  had  heard his Yiddish-speaking grandmother announce that she needed a “football” for a large party she would be hosting that evening. Although the young Sherman wondered why his grandmother needed a football, he was determined to obtain one for her. He went around his neighborhood and finally found one boy, a bully who punched (e) him in the nose before agreeing to give over his football in exchange for Sherman’s best toys.
* Yiddish: 독일어ㆍ히브리어 등의 혼성 언어

41.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)



4.위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Focus Your Energy on Seizing an Opportunity
② Turn Your Attention to the Unemployed
③ Work Stress: How You Can Beat It
④ Enduring Uncertainty Is a Sign of Maturity
⑤ Anticipating Disaster Is Worse Than Disaster

45.위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① removed	② renewed
③ visualized	④ introduced
⑤ underestimated





2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지	1



6.  대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




6. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I think we should.
② We enjoyed a great party.
③ I  wonder  why  they  cancelled it.
④ Yes,  we  can  attend  the meeting.
⑤ No, I don’t have time for dinner.




7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. Now I can go on a vacation.
② Of course. I did everything I could do.
③ Thank you. I’ll delete the files right away.
④ I’m sorry. I’ll finish it as soon as possible.
⑤ Don’t apologize. I’m sure you’ll get better soon.


8. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 원예 동아리  가입을 권유하려고
② 티셔츠  수령  방법을 안내하려고
③ 채소 재배 방법을  설명하려고
④ 회장 후보 자격을  공지하려고
⑤ 회비 납부를 요청하려고


9. 대화를  듣고, 두  사람이  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 독서가 글쓰기에 미치는 영향
② 토론 능력 향상을 위한 방법
③ 일기를 쓸 때의 유의 사항
④ 자유 토론 방식의 장점
⑤ 잘못된 상식의 위험성


10. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 소설가 － 독자	② 면접관 － 구직자
③ 사진작가 － 패션모델	④ 잡지 기자 － 영화배우
⑤ 관광 가이드 － 여행객




29. 대화를  듣고, 여자가  남자를  위해  할  일로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 요리책 소개하기	② 조리사 추천하기
③ 요리 수업 신청하기	④ 조리 기구 준비하기
⑤ 요리 웹사이트 알려 주기

30. 대화를  듣고, 남자가  변경된  시간에  배드민턴  연습을  할  수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 댄스 연습을  해야 해서
② 코치를  구할 수 없어서
③ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
④ 학교 행사에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 도서관 아르바이트를 해야 해서

31. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $300	② $360	③ $450	④ $500	⑤ $540

32. 대화를  듣고, 학부모  교사  회의에  관해  두  사람이  언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 유인물 복사	② 컴퓨터 설치	③ 간식 구입
④ 강당 청소	⑤ 현수막 걸기

33. summer  camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 수영장 시설을 갖추고 있다.
② 수학과 과학 프로그램을 제공한다.
③ 캠프 기간은 5일이다.
④ 등록비는 무료이다.
⑤ 온라인 신청만 가능하다.




2	


34. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고, 두  사람이  관람할  영화를
고르시오. [3점]
Movie Information

①
②
③
④
⑤

35. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Okay. I’ll go find another one soon.
② Never mind. I’ll give you my advice.
③ But didn’t you already contact him last year?
④ I’m sure you’ll do a great job at the program.
⑤ Then can you send them to me by text message?
36. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① I’d like to publish a book.
② I’ll deliver them on schedule.
③ I’d prefer to get them by mail.
④ I’ll be right back and buy them.
⑤ I’ll revise the review right away.
37. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Helen이  손님에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Helen:   	
① Don’t worry. I will hold the shirt for you.
② I’m sorry, but we don’t sell products on credit.
③ You can visit the lost and found for your wallet.
④ I apologize. We don’t have anything in your size.
⑤ Let me show you a different type of shirt instead.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
38. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to become organized
② the importance of donation
③ factors that affect personality
④ why we should collect things
⑤ problems of throwing things away
39. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① papers	② clock	③ toys
④ lamp	⑤ flower vase


40. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?



Dear Ms. Mattie,

Thank you very much for offering me the research engineer position at ABC Company.  However, after  a great deal of thought, I have decided not to accept  the position. Your company has  an excellent  reputation as a research institution and has many  aspects that  are very attractive to me. Unfortunately, I cannot accept your offer because I have decided to pursue another opportunity. Once again, thank you for your consideration.
Very truly yours, Christine Mahoe

① 입사  제안을 거절하려고
② 계약  조건을 확인하려고
③ 업무  조정을 요청하려고
④ 입사 시험 결과를  문의하려고
⑤ 입사 지원 절차를  알아보려고









41. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Obviously, one of the judgments the public has of us is whether or not our telephone service is good. Technically, if they get their calls through, efficiently  and  promptly,  they  get what they want. That, however, is not  all  they  want.  They want to have the service rendered to them in a manner that pleases them; they want not only efficiency but courtesy and consideration; and they are in a  position  to  get  what  they want. They are in the driver’s seat; they are paying the bills; and an understanding of that fact is a real and fundamental basis of public relations.  In  order, therefore,  for a great company to satisfactorily serve the public, it  must  have a philosophy and a method of  doing  business  which  will allow and insure that its people serve  the  public efficiently and in a pleasing manner.
① 성공적인 기업 경영을 위해 사원 복지 향상에 힘써야 한다.
② 효율적이면서 고객을 만족시키는 서비스를 제공해야 한다.
③ 기업 이익의 일정 부분을 사회에 환원해야 한다.
④ 공공 예절을 지키며 휴대 전화를 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 요구에 맞는 신제품을 개발해야 한다.




	 3


42. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　On the path to excellence, some obstacles may  initially  seem overwhelming. Every performer experiences this feeling, even the greatest performers in  the  world.  If  you  believe  that the obstacles are too great to overcome, you will prove yourself right even when you are wrong. Most seemingly impossible obstacles can be overcome by seeing possibilities, focusing on what is within  your  control,  taking  the  first  step, and then focusing on the next step  and  the  next step after that. If your commitment becomes  weak,  remember  your dream and why it  is  important  to  you,  find  simple  joys in your daily pursuits, rejoice in the little  victories or small steps forward, and embrace the process of ongoing learning. With a positive perspective and  persistence,  you  will get through and find a way through all obstacles.
① 시작이 좋아야 큰 성공을 거둘 수 있다.
② 꿈을 이루기 위해 현실적인 목표를 세워야 한다.
③ 긍정적 시각과 끈기가 있으면 난관을 극복할 수 있다.
④ 갈등을 유발하지 않으려면 감정의 조절이 필요하다.
⑤ 지속적인 학습을 위해서는 동기부여가 필요하다.








43. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　For many years now, mediated entertainment such as TV  and film has been able to stimulate our optical and auditory senses with sights and sounds. Some forms of new media, however, even engage our senses of touch and  smell.  The view the wearer of some special device sees is  projected  on the screen behind him. Wearers become immersed in the computerized scene and use  the  gloves  to  pick  up  and  move simulated objects. Many virtual  reality  games  and  rides now allow audiences and players to feel sensations of motion and touch. New media may  also  include  aromas,  such as Disney’s “Soaring Over California” attraction at the California Adventure theme park, where audiences smell orange orchards and pine forests while enjoying a simulated hang-gliding experience across the countryside. Makers of emerging forms of entertainment will likely continue to experiment with ways they can simulate and manipulate  reality by stimulating our senses.
① TV and Film: Blessing or Curse?
② How We Operate an Audio System
③ Seeing Is More Important Than Touching
④ “Soaring Over California,” a Theme Park Adventure
⑤ New Mediated Entertainment: Stimulate More Senses!
44. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Recently, researchers have suggested that the purpose of laughter is not just to communicate that one is in a playful state, but to actually induce this state in others as well. According to this view, the peculiar sounds of laughter have    a direct effect on the listener, inducing positive emotional arousal that mirrors the emotional state  of  the  laugher, perhaps by activating certain specialized brain circuits. In this way, laughter may serve an important biosocial function of coupling together the positive emotions of members of  a  group and thereby coordinating their activities. This would explain why laughter is so infectious; when we hear someone laughing, it is almost impossible not to feel  cheerful  and  begin laughing too.
① effects of laughter on others
② benefits of activating brain circuits
③ strategies for coordinating activities
④ negative aspects of emotional reactions
⑤ importance of grouping in communication



45. NAS Bird Watching Adventure에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


nAS  Bird  Watching  Adventure
NAS National Wildlife Refuge, Houston Sunday, July 20, 2014, 8:00 － 18:00
$80  per person

　The tour starts  at the NAS Forest & Trail Headquarters at 8:00 am. Once we arrive at the refuge at about 10:00 am, we will begin our  six-hour hike, searching for birds and learning about the plants and animals of the refuge.
?What  to  expect:  The  hike  covers  3  to  4  miles and includes moderately difficult terrain.
?What’s   provided:  Transportation,	lunch,   and expert guides.
?What  to  bring:  Comfortable  shoes,  long  pants, and sunblock.
For more information, visit www.wls.gov/nasforest.

① NAS  Forest  &  Trail  Headquarters에서 오전 8시에 시작된다.
② 야생 생물 보호 구역의 동식물에 관해서 배울 수 있다.
③ 도보 여행의 거리는 3～4  마일이다.
④ 교통편은 제공하지만 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
⑤ 편한 신발, 긴 바지, 자외선 차단제를 가져와야 한다.




4	


46. Swan Lake에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

SWAN LAKE
July 3 (Thu.) - 4 (Fri.), 2014, at the State Theater

Time:	Thu. 8:00 pm / Fri. 7:00 pm Prices: A Seats - $120 / B Seats - $90 Running Time: 2 hours
Minimum Age: Children under 7 will not be admitted.

The ballet is performed to  the  live  music  of  the  State Theater Orchestra.
?20%  Early  Purchase  Discount  until  May  31
- To receive this discount, you must purchase your tickets from our website at www.statetheater.com.
?Phone  Reservations:  887-885-7909
- Business hours: 09:00 － 18:00 (7 days a week)
?Cancellation  Policy
- On the day of performance: No refund
- 1～5 days before the performance: 30% cancellation fee


① 공연 시간은 세 시간 동안이다.
② 녹음된 음악에 맞춰 발레가 공연된다.
③ 웹사이트에서 5월 31일까지 티켓을 구매하면 할인 혜택이 있다.
④ 전화 예매는 평일에만 가능하다.
⑤ 공연 당일에 취소해도 환불받을 수 있다.


47. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?










　The above graph shows the percentage of U.S. advertising spending by media and consumer time spent using each  type  of media in 2011. ① In the case of TV, both advertising spending and consumer time spent took up the largest proportion with 43% and 40%, respectively. ② Print ranked second in advertising  spending,  whereas  it  ranked  last in consumer time spent. ③ Web accounted for the third largest proportion in both  advertising  spending  and  consumer time spent. ④ As for the percentage gap between advertising spending and  consumer  time  spent,  Radio showed the smallest gap. ⑤ The percentage gap between advertising spending and consumer time spent was larger in Web than in Mobile.
48. 
Tammy Rahr에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　During  her childhood years, the artist Tammy  Rahr spent    a lot of time outdoors making things from flowers and dirt. Then Tammy and her family moved from the woodlands of New York State to an urban city outside of Los Angeles, California. The experience made her more aware of what was going on in the world. After returning to  New  York  State with her family, Tammy faced another  lesson  in growing up.  A gifted student, she was sent to college when she was just
14. Tammy was able to earn her high school diploma  and some college credit before trying her hand at a number of different jobs. Eventually, she moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico, and studied at the Institute of American Indian Arts. After graduating from the institute, she remained active with it and  the museum there.
① 어린 시절에 꽃과 흙으로 무언가를 만들면서 많은 시간을 보냈다.
② New  York  주에서 California로 이사했다.
③ 가족과 함께 New  York  주로 되돌아갔다.
④ 고등학교 졸업장을 받지 못했다.
⑤ Institute  of  American  Indian  Arts에서 공부했다.















49. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In the twentieth century, advances in technology, from refrigeration   to   sophisticated   ovens  to   air transportation
① that  carries  fresh  ingredients  around  the world, contributed
immeasurably to baking and pastry making.  At the  beginning of the twenty-first century, the popularity of fine breads and pastries ② are growing even faster than new chefs can be trained. Interestingly enough, many  of  the technological  advances in bread making have sparked a reaction among bakers and consumers ③ alike. They are looking to reclaim some of the flavors of old-fashioned breads that ④ were lost as baking became more industrialized and baked goods became more refined, standardized, and ― some would say ― flavorless. Bakers are researching methods for ⑤ producing the handmade sourdough breads of the past, and they  are  experimenting  with specialty flours in their search for flavor.




	 5


50. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
　Although children watch television at various times, the programming that they view alone tends to be specifically aimed at children. In the United States particularly,  most  of the advertising during this segment consists of ads for food, particularly sugared food. During the run-up to Christmas,
(A) increasing / decreasing numbers of ads concern toys and games. Such practices  are  believed  to put pressure  on parents to yield to what the media  have  dubbed  “pester  power.”  This has led to calls for legislation to (B) promote / regulate advertising in Europe and the United States. Indeed, the Swedish government has outlawed television advertising of products aimed at children under 12, and recently in  the  United States, 50 psychologists (C) rejected / signed a petition calling for a ban on the advertising of children’s goods.
* pester  power:  부모에게  떼를  써서 물건을 구매하게  하는 힘
** petition:  탄원(서)

[30～32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The true champion recognizes that excellence often flows most smoothly from 	, a  fact  that can  get lost   in
these high-tech days. I used to train  with  a  world-class  runner who was constantly hooking himself up to  pulse  meters and pace keepers. He spent hours collecting data that  he thought would help him improve. In fact, a good  25  percent of his athletic time was devoted  to  externals  other than working out. Sports became so complex for him that he forgot how to enjoy himself. Contrast his approach with that   of the late Abebe Bikila, the Ethiopian who won the 1960 Olympic Marathon running barefoot. High-tech clothing and digital watches were not part of his world. Abebe Bikila  simply ran. Many times in running, and  in  other  areas  of  life, less is more. [3점]
① talent	② patience	③ simplicity
④ generosity	⑤ confidence

(A) (B)	(C)
① increasing …… promote …… rejected
② increasing   …… regulate	…… signed
③ increasing   …… regulate	…… rejected
④ decreasing   …… promote   …… signed
⑤ decreasing  …… regulate	…… signed















29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Dave Butcher, director of training  for  Sea  World  in Florida, showed me more than I’d imagined possible. His sea lions worked for social rewards  as well as  fish.  Consequently, he did not have to keep his sea lions hungry in order to make
① them  perform.  During  and  after  the  day’s performances,
the sea lions could have all the fish ② they wanted. One result was that ③ they were not irritable, as any hungry animal might be. The sea lions were friendly to those humans they knew and enjoyed being with ④ them. I was surprised to see trainers on their lunch hour  sunbathing in  a pile  with their  sea lions. Another result of stopping  food  deprivation  was that these sea lions grew and grew! In fact, ⑤ they became bigger than most trained sea lions in the past, which weren’t given enough food.
46. 
The origins of contemporary Western thought can be
traced back to the golden age of ancient Greece, when Greek thinkers laid the foundations for modern Western politics, philosophy, science, and law. Their novel approach was to pursue rational inquiry through adversarial discussion: The  best way  to  evaluate  one  set  of  ideas,  they  decided,  was by 	. In the political sphere, the result was democracy,  in  which supporters of rival policies vied for rhetorical supremacy; in philosophy, it led to reasoned arguments and dialogues  about the nature of the world; in science, it prompted the  construction of competing theories to try to explain natural phenomena; in the field of law, the result was the adversarial legal system. This approach is the foundation for the modern Western way of life, in which politics, commerce, science, and  law are all rooted in orderly competition. [3점]
* adversarial: 대립 관계의
** vie:  다투다,  경쟁하다
① forcing it upon the opponents
② pursuing a conventional standard
③ testing it against another set of ideas
④ promoting a consensus among supporters
⑤ rejecting competing theories without discussion




6	


47. I would like to compare the shift from analog to
digital  film-making  to  the  shift  from  fresco  and  tempera  to oil  painting  in  the  early  Renaissance.  A  painter  making a fresco has  limited  time  before  the  paint  dries,  and  once  it has dried, no further changes to the image are possible. Similarly, a traditional filmmaker has limited means of modifying images once they are recorded on film.  Medieval tempera painting can be compared to the practice of special effects during  the  analog  period  of cinema.  A  painter  working  with  tempera  could   modify and rework  the  image,  but  the  process  was  painstaking  and slow. The switch to oils greatly liberated painters by allowing them to quickly  create  much  larger  compositions  as well as to modify them as long as necessary. Similarly,
 	, digital technology  redefines  what  can  be  done  with  cinema. [3점]
① by equating oil painting with analog film-making
② by allowing  a  filmmaker  to  treat  a  film  image  as  an  oil painting
③ with  the  shift  from  oil  painting  styles  to  fresco  ones  in making films
④ by	integrating	fresco	painting	techniques	into	the film-making process
⑤ with the introduction of tempera painting methods to cinematic special effects

48. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? When there is a discrepancy between  the verbal message and the nonverbal message, the  latter  typically weighs more in  forming a judgment. 		(A)			, a friend might react to a plan for dinner with a comment like “that’s good,” but with little vocal enthusiasm  and  a  muted  facial  expression. In spite of the verbal comment, the lack of expressive enthusiasm	suggests		that	the		plan	isn’t	viewed	very positively. In such a case, the purpose of  the  positive comment might be to avoid a disagreement and support the friend, but the lack of a positive expression unintentionally leaks a more candid, negative  reaction  to  the plan.  Of course, the muted expressive display might also be strategic and	intentional. 	(B)	,		the	nonverbal		message	is deliberate, but designed to let the partner know one’s candid reaction indirectly. It is then the partner’s responsibility to interpret the nonverbal message and make some adjustment
in the plan.

(A) (B)
① In  addition	…… Instead
② In  addition	…… However
③ In  contrast	…… That is
④ For example …… However
⑤ For example …… That is
49. 
다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Early one night in  1973  in  my  old  and  cheap  apartment in Bangor, Maine, I got a phone call from my  agent,  Bill,  who was helping me publish my  first  novel.  “Are  you  sitting down?” Bill asked. “No,” I said. “Do  I  need  to?”  “You might,” he said.  “The  publication  rights  for  your  book were sold for four hundred thousand dollars!” I was completely speechless. That amount of money  was  beyond my wildest expectations. I was sure  I  hadn’t  heard  him  right. I couldn’t have. I asked, “Did  you  say  it  went  for  forty thousand dollars?” Bill said it again as clearly as he could, “Four hundred thousand dollars. Congratulations, Steve.” “Are you sure, Bill?” I said in disbelief. He said he was. We talked for another half an hour, but  I  don’t  remember a single word of what we said.
① angry	② jealous
③ astonished	④ sympathetic
⑤ disappointed

[35～36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
50. Music can convey the scope of a film, effectively communicating whether the motion picture is  an epic drama  or a story that exists on a more personal scale. Music can convey the quality and size of a space. ① For example, in Alien  and  Olivier’s  Hamlet,  the  music  serves  at times  to make
small and/or artificial spaces seem more  grand  and  to enhance the sense of realism. ② In addition, music can establish a narrative’s placement in time. ③ Music for motion pictures often serves to authenticate the era or to provide a sense of nostalgia. ④ Music has traditionally been classified by musical instruments. ⑤ Examples of the former would include Amadeus and Immortal Beloved, while a sense of nostalgia is communicated through the music selected  for films such as American Graffiti and The Big Chill.

51. It is difficult to appreciate what a temperature of 20,000,000℃ means.  ① If  the  solar  surface,  not  the center,
were as hot  as this, the  radiation emitted into space would    be so great that the whole Earth would be vaporized within      a few minutes. ② Indeed, this is just what would happen if some cosmic giant were to peel off the outer  layers  of  the Sun like skinning an orange, for the tremendously hot inner regions would then be exposed. ③ It is believed that the brightness  of  the  Sun  can  be  predicted  theoretically.
④ Fortunately, no such circumstance is possible, and  the outer layers of the Sun provide  a sort of blanket  that  protects  us from its inner fires. ⑤ Yet in spite of these blanketing layers, some energy must leak  through  from the Sun’s center to its outer regions, and this leakage is of just  the  right  amount to compensate for the radiation  emitted  by  the surface into surrounding space.




	 7


[37～38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
52. 

(A) Then I can play the film backward and watch the cat fly down to the floor and see all the  splashes  of  ice  cream  slurp themselves back into the dish. I made Simon jump  in and out several times before I watched the rest of the film.
(B) He said I could do  everything  myself  that  night.  So  I set up the screen at one end of the  living  room.  I turned  on the projector, turned off the light, put the bowl of popcorn in my lap, and settled in to watch the  film  labeled HATTIE-1951.
(C) It’s one of my favorites because my third birthday party   is on it and I can watch our old cat  Simon  jump  up on the dining room table and land in a dish of ice cream.
* slurp: 후루룩 소리를 내다
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



53. 
54. 
글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한
곳은?

　Parents often believe that they are providing help to their children when they constantly correct and criticize them, assuming that they will grow from these remarks. But ask yourself: Do you like being corrected? Do  you grow when  you are constantly criticized? ( ① )  In  truth,  we  tend  to  stay the same when we are criticized. ( ② ) We want  to defend what we have done, and our innate stubbornness  refuses to permit us to accept the criticism we are receiving.     ( ③ ) Behind virtually all criticism is the sentence “If only  you were more like me, and living life  as  I  see  it,  you  would be a lot better off.” ( ④ ) Praise your children for attempting a task, even if it was  unsuccessful,  and  for  taking risks. ( ⑤ ) Create an environment in which your children know that you are with them in their efforts, rather than looking to criticize them.

55. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





(A) In addition to that benefit, helping lower-ability students often pulls higher-ability students to a more sophisticated understanding of the material. The clich? that teachers learn as much as their pupils is certainly true.
(B) Not quite. Knowledge, happily, is not a zero-sum product. Higher-ability students can reinforce their own knowledge  by teaching those with lower ability.
(C) Specifically, the technique of having students help one another raises the question of whether students with lower ability are being helped at the expense of  those  with higher ability. Is this true?
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)






?



(A) (B)
① associate …… genetic
② associate …… environmental
③ identify	…… psychological
④ replace	…… psychological
⑤ replace	…… environmental





8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 




(C) 
　I was born  into  a large poor family in Chicago. As a kid, I had visions of being a hero ― a police officer or an astronaut. However, people would always tell me,  “You  can’t do that. You aren’t smart enough. You aren’t strong enough.” Moreover, (d) I didn’t  do well in school,  and I had  no hope of getting into any college. After  high  school,  I gave up on my dream of going to college  and  got  a  part-time job instead. I felt like I was living in a box labeled “This is where you belong.”
(D) 









56. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Give Simpler Answers!
② How  Can  We  Ask  Questions  Properly?
③ Scientific  Facts:  What  the  Asker Needs
④ Accurate Answers: A Mirror of Knowledge
⑤ Why Is Giving Direct Answers Problematic?

57. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① efficiency	② diversity	③ fluency
④ privacy	⑤ honesty



[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　It was my last football game as a college player. I  made  the final  tackle  and  we  won.  As  people  chanted  my name, (a) I was carried off the  field  on  the  shoulders  of  my teammates. Although I wasn’t  a  great  student  or  a  great football player, I ended up not only graduating from   my dream university but becoming a hero of the  team.  People keep asking me how I did it. Here is my story.






58. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

59. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

60. 위 글의 주인공에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 풋볼 선수였다.
② 육군에 입대했다.
③ Chicago에서 태어났다.
④ 고등학교 졸업 직후 대학에 진학했다.
⑤ 입학하고 싶어하는 대학의 교수를 찾아갔다.



2018학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① He’s a gardener.
② She’s taking a picture.
③ It’s next to Central Zoo.
④ It’s open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
⑤ I’m not free this weekend.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. You can teach me French later.
② Okay. I’ll make a reservation for five people.
③ No problem. They’ve already had lunch.
④ Of course. I really love these five books.
⑤ No. They didn’t come to the meeting.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 글쓰기 특강 참석을 독려하려고
② 효과적인 학습 전략을 소개하려고
③ 교내 수학 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
④ 온라인 설문 조사 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 장학금 신청 방법 변경 사항을 안내하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 좋은 대본을 쓰려면 다양한 경험이 필요하다.
② 충분한 수면은 기억력 강화에 도움이 된다.
③ 반복적인 연습은 좋은 결과를 낳는다.
④ 건강을 위해서 일찍 일어나야 한다.
⑤ 실수는 성공의 밑거름이 된다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 편집장 － 기자
② 서점 직원 － 학생
③ 인쇄소 직원 － 교사
④ 기계 수리공 － 경비원
⑤ 실내 디자이너 － 건축가


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 경고 방송하기	② 게시판 만들기
③ 경고문 복사하기	④ 사무실 청소하기
⑤ 불법 광고물 제거하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 청력이 나빠진 이유를 고르시오.
① 시끄러운 음악을 헤드폰을 쓰고 자주 들어서
② 도서관 공사 소음에 오랫동안 노출되어서
③ 과도한 업무에 대한 스트레스 때문에
④ 귓속에 이물질이 들어가서
⑤ 신체 노화로 인하여


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54	② $60	③ $70	④ $81	⑤ $90


10. 대화를 듣고, ‘I Care, We Cure’ 행사에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적	② 프로그램	③ 장소
④ 초청 강사	⑤ 입장료


11. Orange Tree Day Care Center에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Green Oak Park 옆에 위치해 있다.
② 연령에 알맞은 다양한 활동을 제공한다.
③ 울타리가 있는 놀이터가 있다.
④ 점심 식사와 함께 신선한 과일을 제공한다.
⑤ 월요일부터 토요일까지 문을 연다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?



13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① I’ll record your performance with my phone.
② We’ll look for pictures of famous pianists.
③ I still have time to visit my uncle.
④ Your parents will get well soon.
⑤ The audience was not so big.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Sure. I often let my students go home early.
② Exactly. The video clip wasn’t helpful at all.
③ True. The professor was praised for his hard work.
④ Yeah. You should’ve gone to the lecture yesterday.
⑤ Right. We shouldn’t focus only on results when praising students.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Lucy가 Ben에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Lucy:   	
① Sorry. Your flight is canceled due to bad weather.
② Come on. We need to leave for the airport now.
③ That’s okay. They arrived there on time.
④ Welcome. Thank you for flying with us.
⑤ Never mind. We can meet on Saturday.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① necessity of teaching hunting skills
② various ways to feed young animals
③ animal fathers’ dedication to parenting
④ sacrifice of animal mothers for their babies
⑤ importance of animal reproduction in the wild

17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① emperor penguin	② bullfrog
③ seahorse	④ giant water bug
⑤ sea catfish










① 소설 창작 과정에 관한 강연을 요청하려고
② 강연 일정이 변경된 것에 대해 사과하려고
③ 새로 발간된 잡지의 정기 구독을 권유하려고
④ 출판물 편집에 관한 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 잘못된 기사 내용에 대해 정정을 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Kate의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sipping coffee leisurely at a caf?, Kate was enjoying the view of the Ponte Vecchio across the Arno. As an architect  and professor, she had taught about the historical significance of the bridge to her students for years. A smile crept across   her face. It was her first time to actually see it in person. Though not as old as the bridges of Rome, it was absolutely a work of art. If the fleeing Nazis had destroyed it during World War II, she would have never seen it. She was happy that she could view the bridge in the twilight. Free from her daily concerns, her mind began to wander from the unforgettable views of the still Arno to all the unexpected but pleasant encounters with other tourists. The trip was a rare liberating experience. Kate felt that all her concerns had melted away.
① anxious and envious	② bored and indifferent
③ pleased and relaxed	④ confused and puzzled
⑤ disappointed and regretful
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sure, we’ve all heard the advice: “Follow your passion.” It’s great when you hit the jackpot and find a career that melds your strengths and passions, and where there is demand in the highly competitive global marketplace of today. But if your goal is to get a job at the end of the rainbow, you must distinguish between your major, your passions, your strengths, and your career path. Your strengths are more important than your passions. Studies show that the best career choices tend to be grounded in things you’re good at, more so than your interests and passions. Ideally, you want to find a convergence of your strengths and your values with a career path that is in demand. Interests can come and go. Your strengths are your core, your hard-wired assets.
* meld: 섞다  ** convergence: 합류점
① 진로 계획을 세울 때 시장의 수요를 정확히 예측해야 한다.
② 직업을 선택할 때 본인의 강점을 우선적으로 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하기 위해서는 열정을 가져야 한다.
④ 원하는 직업을 갖기 위해서는 전공을 잘 선택해야 한다.
⑤ 취업을 준비할 때 다른 사람의 조언을 잘 들어야 한다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Parents are quick to inform friends and relatives as soon as their infant holds her head up, reaches for objects, sits by herself, and walks alone. Parental enthusiasm for these motor accomplishments is not at all misplaced, for they are, indeed, milestones of development. With each additional skill, babies gain control over their bodies and the environment in a new way. Infants who are able to sit alone are granted an entirely different perspective on the world than are those who spend much of their day on their backs or stomachs. Coordinated reaching opens up a whole new avenue for exploration of objects, and when babies can move about, their opportunities for independent exploration and manipulation are multiplied. No longer are they restricted to their immediate locale and to objects that others place before them. As new ways of controlling the environment are achieved, motor development provides the infant with a growing sense of competence and mastery, and it contributes in important ways to the infant’s perceptual and cognitive understanding of the world.
* locale: 현장, 장소
① 유아의 운동 능력 발달은 유아의 다른 발달에 기여한다.
② 부모와의 정서적 교감은 유아의 지적 호기심을 자극한다.
③ 부모의 관심은 유아의 균형 있는 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④ 주변 환경의 변화는 유아기 운동 능력 발달을 촉진한다.
⑤ 유아는 시행착오를 통해 공간 지각 능력을 발달시킨다.

22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　It is a strategic and tactical mistake to give an offensive position away to those who will use it to attack, criticize, and blame. Since opponents will undoubtedly attack, criticize, and blame, anyway, the advantages of being proactive, airing one’s own “dirty laundry,” and “telling on oneself ” are too significant to ignore. Chief among these advantages is the ability to control the first messages and how a story is first framed. That leaves others having to respond to you instead of the other way around. This approach is appropriately termed “stealing thunder.” When an organization steals thunder, it breaks the news about its own crisis before the crisis is discovered by the media or other interested parties. In experimental research by Arpan and Roskos-Ewoldsen, stealing thunder in a crisis situation, as opposed to allowing the information to be first disclosed by another party, resulted in substantially higher credibility ratings. As significant, the authors found that “credibility ratings associated with stealing thunder directly predicted perceptions of the crisis as less severe.”
* dirty laundry: 치부, 수치스러운 일
① necessity of being cooperative in a crisis situation
② importance of taking the initiative in managing a crisis
③ problem of creating false stories to save an organization
④ significance of remaining silent in strengthening credibility
⑤ advantage of improving the corporate image through media
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　If you’ve ever seen the bank of flashing screens at  a  broker’s desk, you have a sense of the information overload they are up against. When deciding whether to invest in a company, for example, they may take into account the people at the helm; the current and potential size of its market; net profits; and its past, present, and future stock value, among other pieces of information. Weighing all of these factors can take up so much of your working memory that it becomes overwhelmed. Think of having piles and piles of  papers,  sticky notes, and spreadsheets strewn about your  desk,  and you get a picture of what’s going on inside the brain. When information overloads working memory this way, it can make brokers ― and the rest of us ― scrap all the strategizing and analyses and go for emotional, or gut, decisions.
* at the helm: 실권을 가진 ** strewn: 표면을 뒤덮은
① How Information Overload Can Cloud Your Judgment
② Multitasking Increases Your Working Memory!
③ How to Prevent Information Flood
④ Do Flashing Screens Reduce Information Overload?
⑤ Emotional Judgment: The Secret of Successful Brokers

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?















　The above graph shows direct expenditures on education as a percentage of GDP for the five OECD countries with the highest percentages in 2011, by level of education. ① All the five countries spent over seven percent of their GDP on direct expenditures on education for all institutions combined. ② Of the five countries, Denmark spent the highest percentage of GDP for all institutions combined. ③ In terms of direct expenditures on elementary and secondary education, New Zealand spent  the highest percentage of GDP among the five countries. ④ As for direct expenditures on postsecondary education, Iceland spent a higher percentage of GDP than the other four countries.
⑤ Compared with the Republic of Korea, Israel spent a lower percentage of GDP on postsecondary education.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Albert C. Barnes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Born into a working-class family in 1872, Albert C. Barnes grew up in Philadelphia. He became interested in art when he became friends with future artist William Glackens in high
school. He earned a medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania and qualified as a doctor in 1892. Barnes  decided not to work as a doctor, and after further study he entered the business world. In 1901, he invented the antiseptic Argyrol with a German chemist and made a fortune. Using his wealth, he began purchasing hundreds of paintings. In 1922,  he established the Barnes Foundation to promote the education of fine arts. There he displayed his huge collection without detailed explanation. He died in a car accident in 1951.
* antiseptic: 소독제, 방부제
① 1872년에 태어나 Philadelphia에서 성장했다.
② University of Pennsylvania에서 의학 학위를 받았다.
③ 독일인 화학자와 함께 Argyrol을 발명하였다.
④ 미술 교육을 장려하기 위해 Barnes Foundation을 설립했다.
⑤ 자세한 설명과 함께 소장품을 전시했다.









26. Mountaintop Yodeling Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
　Show off your yodeling skills with the backdrop of the beautiful Alps.
?Place: special outdoor stage set up at Mt. Billatus (2,545 m)
?Time & Date: 2:00 p.m. on June 12, 2017
?Registration (online only): until June 1 (www.yodel.net)
?Requirements
- All contestants should sing a 2-minute yodel of their choice.
- All yodels should be sung either in French or in English.
?Prizes
- 1st place: a round-trip airplane ticket to London
- 2nd place: a Swiss watch
* The contest will be canceled if the weather is unfavorable.

① Mt. Billatus에 설치된 특별 야외무대에서 열린다.
② 등록 기한은 6월 1일까지이다.
③ 프랑스어나 영어로 요들을 불러야 한다.
④ 2등 상품은 London  왕복 항공권이다.
⑤ 날씨가 좋지 않으면 취소된다.
27. 
Summerville Forest Trail Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Summerville Forest Trail Tour
　Just five miles away from the big city, you can enjoy the huge variety of plants and wildlife at Summerville Forest. We offer a trail tour every Saturday from June to September. Come and join us!
Tickets
?$10 (for 8 and older)
?$5   (for children under 8)
* Snacks and water will be provided.
Tour Schedule
?8:30 a.m.－ 9:00 a.m. Introduction to Summerville Forest
?9:00 a.m.－11:00 a.m. Trail Walking Tour
Reservations should be made online (www.summerville.net) at least one week in advance of your visit.

① 6월부터 9월까지 매주 일요일에 진행된다.
② 8세 미만 아이들은 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
③ 간식과 물이 제공된다.
④ Summerville Forest에 대한 소개가 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 온라인 예약은 방문 하루 전까지 해야 한다.










28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Though most bees fill their days visiting flowers and collecting pollen, some bees take advantage  of  the  hard work of others. These thieving bees sneak into the nest of an
① unsuspecting “normal” bee (known as the host), lay an egg near the pollen mass being gathered by the host bee for her own offspring, and then sneak back out. When the egg of the thief hatches, it kills the host’s offspring and then eats the pollen meant for ② its victim. Sometimes called brood parasites, these bees are also referred to as cuckoo bees, because they are similar to cuckoo birds, which lay an egg in the nest of another bird and ③ leaves it for that bird to raise. They are more ④ technically called cleptoparasites. Clepto means “thief” in Greek, and the term cleptoparasite refers specifically to an organism ⑤ that lives off  another by stealing its food. In this case the cleptoparasite feeds on the host’s hard-earned pollen stores.
* brood parasite: (알을 대신 기르도록 하는) 탁란 동물


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Some coaches erroneously believe that mental  skills  training (MST) can only help perfect the performance of  highly skilled competitors. As a result, they shy away from MST, (A) denying / rationalizing that because they are not coaching elite athletes, mental skills training is less important. It is true that mental skills become increasingly important at high levels of competition. As athletes move up the competitive ladder, they become more homogeneous in terms of physical skills. In fact, at high levels of competition, all athletes have the physical skills to be successful. Consequently, any small difference in (B) physical / mental factors can  play  a  huge role in determining performance outcomes. However, we can anticipate that personal growth and performance will progress faster in young, developing athletes who are given mental  skills training than in athletes not exposed to MST. In fact, the optimal time for introducing MST may be when athletes are first beginning their sport. Introducing MST (C)  early / later  in athletes’ careers may lay the foundation that will help them develop to their full potential.
* homogeneous: 동질적인 ** optimal: 최적의
(A) (B)	(C)
① denying …… physical …… later
② denying          …… mental     …… early
③ rationalizing   …… physical   …… early
④ rationalizing …… physical …… later
⑤ rationalizing …… mental …… early






30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Medicine became big business with the expansion of new, higher-cost treatments and the increased numbers of  health care providers in the United States. As more health care providers  entered  the  market,  competition  increased  among
① them. Interestingly, the increase in competition led health care  providers  to  recommend  more  services  to  the persons
② they served. This phenomenon reflects a unique feature in the health care industry ― provider-induced demand, which allows health care providers to maintain ③ their income even as competition increases. Average consumers of health care   do not know how to diagnose ④ their medical conditions and do not have a license to order services or prescribe medications. So consumers rely on the knowledge of health care providers to determine what services are needed, even though ⑤ they stand to make more money by ordering more services.

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Interest in extremely long periods of time sets geology and astronomy apart from other sciences. Geologists think  in  terms of billions of years for the age of Earth and its oldest rocks ― numbers that, like the national debt, are not easily comprehended. Nevertheless, the   	                                             are   important for environmental geologists because they provide a way to measure human impacts on the  natural  world. For example, we would like to know the rate of natural soil formation from solid rock to determine whether topsoil erosion from agriculture is too great. Likewise, understanding how climate has changed over millions of years is vital to properly assess current global warming trends. Clues to past environmental change are well preserved in many different kinds of rocks.
① time scales of geological activity
② global patterns in species diversity
③ regional differences in time perception
④ statistical methods for climate projections
⑤ criticisms of geological period classifications






32. Politics cannot be suppressed, whichever policy process is employed and however sensitive and respectful of differences it might be. In other words, there is no end to politics. It is wrong to think that proper institutions, knowledge, methods   of consultation, or participatory mechanisms can make disagreement go away. Theories of all sorts promote the view that there are ways by which disagreement can be processed   or managed so as to make it disappear. The  assumption  behind those theories is that disagreement is wrong and consensus is the desirable state of things. In fact, consensus rarely comes without some forms of subtle coercion and the absence  of fear  in  expressing  a  disagreement  is  a  source of
genuine freedom. Debates cause disagreements to evolve,  often for the better, but a positively evolving debate does not have to equal a reduction in disagreement. The suppression of disagreement should never be made into a goal in political deliberation. A defense is required against any suggestion that
 	. [3점]
* consensus: 합의 ** coercion: 강압
① political development results from the freedom of speech
② political disagreement is not the normal state of things
③ politics should not restrict any form of difference
④ freedom could be achieved only through tolerance
⑤ suppression could never be a desirable tool in politics




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. To make plans for the future, the brain must have an ability to take certain elements of prior experiences and reconfigure them in a way that does not copy any actual past experience or present reality exactly. To accomplish that, the organism must go beyond the mere ability to form internal representations,   the models of the world outside. It must acquire the ability to
 	. We can argue that
tool-making, one of the fundamental distinguishing features of primate cognition, depends on this ability, since a tool does   not exist in a ready-made form in the natural environment and has to be imagined in order to be made. The neural machinery for creating and holding ‘images of the future’ was  a  necessary prerequisite for tool-making, and thus for launching human civilization. [3점]
① mirror accurate images of the world outside
② manipulate and transform these models
③ visualize the present reality as it is
④ bring the models back from memory
⑤ identify and reproduce past experiences faithfully









34. Since life began in the oceans, most life, including freshwater life, has a chemical composition more like the ocean than fresh water. It appears that most freshwater life did not originate in fresh water, but is secondarily adapted, having passed from ocean to land and then back again to fresh water. As improbable as this may seem, the bodily fluids of aquatic animals show a strong similarity to oceans, and indeed, most studies of ion balance in freshwater physiology document the complex regulatory mechanisms by which fish, amphibians and invertebrates attempt to 	. It is these sorts of unexpected complexities and apparent contradictions that make ecology so interesting. The idea of a fish in a freshwater lake struggling to accumulate salts inside its body to mimic the ocean reminds one of the other great contradiction of the biosphere: plants are bathed in an atmosphere composed of roughly three-quarters nitrogen, yet their growth is frequently restricted by lack of nitrogen. [3점]
* amphibian: 양서류 ** invertebrate: 무척추동물
① maintain an inner ocean in spite of surrounding fresh water
② attain ion balance by removing salts from inside their body
③ return to the ocean to escape from their natural enemies
④ rebuild their external environment to obtain resources
⑤ change their physiology in accord with their surroundings
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Since the concept of a teddy bear is very obviously not a genetically inherited trait, we can be confident that we are looking at a cultural trait. However, it is a cultural trait that seems to be under the guidance of another, genuinely biological trait: the cues that attract us to babies (high foreheads and small faces). ① Cute, baby-like features are inherently appealing, producing a nurturing response in most humans.  ② Teddy bears that had a more baby-like appearance
― however slight this may have been initially ― were thus
more popular with customers. ③ Teddy bear manufacturers obviously noticed which bears were selling best and so made more of these and fewer of the less popular models, to maximize their profits.  ④ As a result, using animal images  for commercial purposes was faced with severe criticism from animal rights activists. ⑤ In this way, the selection pressure built up by the customers resulted in the evolution of a more baby-like bear by the manufacturers.



[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　It takes time to develop and launch products. Consequently, many companies know 6?12 months ahead of time that they will be launching a new product.

(A) This marketing technique is called demand creation. It involves creating a buzz about a new potentially revolutionary nutrient or training technique through publishing articles and/or books that stimulate the  reader’s interest. Once this is done, a new product is launched.
(B) Over a series of issues, you begin to see more articles discussing this new nutrient and potential to enhance training and/or performance. Then, after 4?6 months, a new product is coincidentally launched that contains the ingredient that has been discussed in previous issues. Books and supplement reviews have also been used as vehicles to promote the sale of fitness and nutrition products.
(C) In order to create interest in the product, companies will often launch pre-market advertising campaigns. In the nutrition industry, articles are often written discussing a new nutrient under investigation.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 

　There’s a direct counterpart to pop music in the classical song, more commonly called  an “art song,” which does  not focus on the development of melodic material.

(A) But the pop song will rarely be sung and played exactly   as written; the singer is apt to embellish that vocal line to give it a “styling,” just as the accompanist will fill out the piano part to make it more interesting and personal. The performers might change the original tempo and mood completely.
(B) Both the pop song and the art song tend to follow tried-and-true structural patterns. And both will be published in the same way ― with a vocal line and  a  basic piano part written out underneath.
(C) You won’t find such extremes of approach by the performers of songs by Franz Schubert or Richard Strauss. These will be performed note for note because both the vocal and piano parts have been painstakingly written down by the composer with an ear for how each relates to the other. [3점]
* embellish: 꾸미다 ** tried-and-true: 유효성이 증명된
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38. 
39. 


Human beings discovered this art thousands of years ago, and they have invented several devices to make it easier and faster.

　In fiber processing the word ‘spinning’ means two quite different things. ( ① ) One is the formation of individual  fibers by squeezing a liquid through one or more small openings in a nozzle called a spinneret and letting it harden. (  ② )  Spiders and silkworms have been spinning fibers in this way for millions of years, but chemists and engineers learned the procedure from them only about a century ago. ( ③ ) In the other kind of spinning ― sometimes called throwing to prevent confusion with the first kind ― two or more fibers are twisted together to form a thread. ( ④ ) The ancient distaff and spindle are examples that were replaced by the spinning wheel in the Middle Ages. ( ⑤ ) Later came the spinning jenny, the water frame, and Crompton’s mule ― spinning machines that became symbols of the Industrial Revolution. [3점]
* distaff and spindle: 실을 감는 막대와 추
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　In mature markets, breakthroughs that lead to a major  change in competitive positions and to the growth of the market are rare. (  ① )  Because of this, competition becomes  a zero sum game in which one organization can only win at   the expense of others. ( ② ) However, where the degree of competition is particularly intense a zero sum game can  quickly become a negative sum game, in that everyone in the market is faced with additional costs.  (  ③ )  As an example  of this, when one of the major high street banks in Britain   tried to gain a competitive advantage by opening on Saturday mornings, it attracted a number of new customers who found the traditional Monday-Friday bank opening hours to be a constraint. (  ④ )  However, faced with a loss of customers,  the competition  responded  by  opening  on  Saturdays  as well. ( ⑤ ) In essence, this proved to be a  negative  sum game.








Our  ancestors   gave   priority   to   (A)   minimum resources rather than pursuing maximum gains, and that was the rational choice for human (B) from  an  evolutionary perspective.

(A) (B)
① securing	…… freedom
② sharing	…… interaction
③ identifying …… exploration
④ sharing	…… prosperity
⑤ securing	…… survival



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 

　It was the day of the final match. That morning Andrew had received a call from the nursing home informing him that Grandad’s condition had become serious. The news played upon Andrew’s mind as (b) he started to play. After several fierce battles, Andrew’s concentration wavered for a moment. His mind travelled to his grandad, who was in another battle for his life. It was then that Andrew made a big mistake! The mistake was a fatal one, and it was all over. (c) He had lost.
(C) 
　Andrew arrived at the nursing home in a gloomy mood, but he was blessed with good news. His grandad was recovering. Andrew was greatly delighted, but (d) he could not help being disappointed in a corner of his mind. “I tried my best to fulfill your dream but I couldn’t make it,” Andrew said in disappointment. “That’s all right,” said Grandad. “The real lesson of chess is learning how to tame your mind. See, my mind has won the battle over my body. I will recover soon and see you become champion one day in perfect health.” Andrew was relieved and smiled with joy.
(D) 













41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Art: A Means to Overcome a Cultural Gap
② Interpreting Culture In and Out of Context
③ Different Forms of Art in the World of Culture
④ Cultural Diversity: Cornerstones of Civilizations
⑤ Culture as a Basis of Understanding the Concept of Art

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reject	② borrow	③ introduce
④ stress	⑤ revive

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)





43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Andrew에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 2016 National Chess Championship 우승자에게 승리를 거두었다.
② 할아버지의 병세에 관한 전화를 받고 결승전에서 큰 실수를 했다.
③ 결승전에서 패배한 사실을 할아버지에게 알리지 않았다.
④ 할아버지로부터 체스가 주는 교훈에 관하여 들었다.
⑤ 어렸을 때 할아버지의 체스 게임을 즐겨 봤다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2018학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의  내용과 일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sure. I like group writing.
② No thanks. I’m full already.
③ Okay. Let’s go to the cafeteria.
④ Great. Let’s check the grammar now.
⑤ You’re right. I’d rather work at home.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. You  really did a good job.
② Don’t worry. I voted for her, too.
③ Well done. That’s exactly what I meant.
④ Of course, you will. I have no doubt about it.
⑤ What a good idea! It’ll be fun to run together.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학교 오케스트라 연주회를 알리려고
② 공연 연습 일정 변경을 공지하려고
③ 고전 음악 감상법을 소개하려고
④ 음악실 사용 규칙을 안내하려고
⑤ 교내 방송부 부원을 모집하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 산책은 창의적 사고에 도움이 된다.
② 과학 교육은 분석 능력을 증진시킨다.
③ 달리기는 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
④ 학력 신장을 위해서는 체력 관리가 중요하다.
⑤ 우선순위를 정하는 것은 일의 효율을 높인다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 얼음 조각가 － 호텔 지배인
② 메이크업 아티스트 － 오페라 가수
③ 의상 디자이너 － 피겨 스케이팅 선수
④ 특수 촬영 감독 － 시나리오 작가
⑤ 동화 작가 － 출판사 편집장


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 음악 파일 확인하기
② 졸업생 인터뷰하기
③ 비디오 편집하기
④ 마이크 점검하기
⑤ 컴퓨터 가져오기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자의 이사를 도와줄 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 회사 야유회에 참석해야 해서
② 발표 자료를 준비해야 해서
③ 친구 병문안을 가야 해서
④ 부모님을 방문해야 해서
⑤ 해외 출장을 가야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36	② $ 45	③ $50	④ $63	⑤ $70

10. 대화를 듣고, Rainbow  Lunch  Box에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 판매 장소	② 종류	③ 크기
④ 가격	⑤ 배달 여부

11. 10th  Special  Lecture에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Robinson  교수가 강연자이다.
② 강연 주제는 야간 빛 공해이다.
③ 10월 2일 오후 4시에 열릴 것이다.
④ 청중은 150명으로 제한된다.
⑤ 입장권은 사전 구매가 가능하다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 주문할 찻주전자를 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Okay. Tell me the address of the store.
② Wow! That looks better than the original one.
③ Great. Thank you for having it repaired on time.
④ Terrific! Put my name on the waiting list, please.
⑤ Definitely. I want a refund for the vacuum cleaner.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① I understand. Don’t blame Peter anymore.
② Perfect. I’ll ask him if he can take your place.
③ Thanks a million. The contest was a big success.
④ Absolutely. I’ll give you a hand with your  speech.
⑤ Awesome. You  can take him to the national finals.

15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Stephanie가 David에게  할  말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Stephanie:   	
① Why don’t you major in art at university?
② I wish I had good presentation skills like you.
③ Would you join me for a visit to an art museum?
④ You should’ve come with me to the museum today.
⑤ It’s worth completing your assignments on your own.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① ways to update big data
② uses of big data in society
③ origin and history of big data
④ pros and cons of big data usage
⑤ limits of data analysis in business

17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① playing fields	② schools	③ stores
④ hospitals	⑤ banks


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Teachers,
　We are pleased to introduce our company’s recently launched emergency training program for teachers. Our CPR class is the most common option for a school. We make it easy for teachers to participate in CPR training at a time to suit your school’s schedule. Our class offers you full life-saving expertise that you can then use to deliver vital support in emergencies. With the proper training, you will be able to perform CPR quickly and effectively and improve a sufferer’s chances of survival. To learn more about our CPR course offerings, please visit our website at www.thebestCPRedu.com.
* CPR(cardiopulmonary resuscitation) : 심폐 소생술
① 효과적인 긴급 구조 요령을 설명하려고
② 심폐 소생술 강좌를 교사에게 홍보하려고
③ 학교의 긴급 구조 교육 일정을 공지하려고
④ 심폐 소생술 강좌의 담당 강사를 모집하려고
⑤ 심폐 소생술 수강 교사의 만족도를 조사하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Lindsay의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　A tear rolled down Lindsay’s cheek. She thought she had put her favorite toy, Blue Bunny, in her bag before school this morning. She had ‘show and tell’ in class today, and she was anxious. Her teacher, Mrs. Cline, might be angry that she had forgotten to bring it. She quickly searched the classroom and checked her bag one more time. Her precious Blue Bunny was a gift from her father, who worked overseas. It was nowhere to be found. Just then, Mrs. Cline appeared in the doorway. “Mrs. Cline!” Lindsay cried. “I can’t find my toy to show in class today. I’m sorry!” Mrs. Cline smiled gently. She was holding the toy. “Oh, Mrs. Cline! Thank you. I thought I had lost Blue Bunny!” Lindsay felt calm and comforted now that she had her toy again.
① excited → confused	② jealous →  relaxed
③ worried → relieved	④ pleased → stressed
⑤ joyful	→ upset

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Once you start to see praise for what it is ― and what it does ― these constant little evaluative outbursts from adults start to produce the same effect as fingernails being dragged down a blackboard. You begin to root for a child to give his teachers or parents a taste of their own treacle by turning around to them and saying (in the same saccharine tone of voice), “Good praising!” Still, it’s not an easy habit to break. It can seem strange, at least at first, to stop praising; it can feel as though you’re being chilly or withholding something. But that, it soon becomes clear, suggests that we praise more because we need to say it than because children need to hear it. Whenever that’s true, it’s time to rethink what we’re doing. What kids do need is unconditional support, love with no strings attached. That’s not just different from praise ― it’s the opposite of praise.
* treacle : 당밀, 달콤한 것
① 아이들을 칭찬하는 습관을 그만두어야 한다.
② 아이들의 눈높이에 맞는 조언을 해 주어야 한다.
③ 아이들의 행동에 대한 무조건적인 지지를 삼가야 한다.
④ 아이들에게 타인을 칭찬하는 습관을 길러 주어야 한다.
⑤ 아이들에게 감정을 솔직하게 표현하는 방법을 가르쳐야 한다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　People sometimes make downward social comparisons ― comparing themselves to inferior or worse-off others ― to feel better about themselves. This is self-enhancement at work. But what happens when the only available comparison target we have is superior or better off than we are? Can self-enhancement motives still be served in such situations? Yes, they can, as captured by the self-evaluation maintenance model. According to this theory, we shift between two processes ― reflection and comparison ― in a way that lets us maintain favorable self-views. In areas that are not especially relevant to our self-definition, we engage in reflection, whereby we flatter ourselves by association with others’ accomplishments. Suppose you care very little about your own athletic skills, but when your friend scores the winning goal during a critical soccer match, you beam with pride, experience a boost to your self-esteem, and take delight in her victory celebrations as if, by association, it were your victory too.
* flatter : 치켜세우다, 아첨하다
① 타인과의 비교를 통해 자신에 대한 객관적 평가를 할 수 있다.
② 자기 분야와 관련 없는 사람들의 성공도 축하해 줄 필요가 있다.
③ 성취도가 낮은 사람들과의 비교는 자기발전에 도움이 되지 않는다.
④ 사람들은 성취도가 높은 사람과 자신을 비교하지 않는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 타인의 성취를 자신과 연결하여 긍정적인 자아상을 유지할 수 있다.







22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Some psychologists believe that insight is the result of a restructuring of a problem after a period of non-progress where the person is believed to be too focused on past experience and get stuck. A new manner to represent the problem is suddenly discovered, leading to a different path to a solution heretofore unpredicted. It has been claimed that no specific knowledge, or experience is required to attain insight in the problem situation. As a matter of fact, one should break away from experience and let the mind wander freely. Nevertheless, experimental studies have shown that insight is actually the result of ordinary analytical thinking. The restructuring of a problem can be caused by unsuccessful attempts in solving the problem, leading to new information being brought in while the person is thinking. The new information can contribute to a completely different perspective in finding a solution, thus producing the Aha! Experience.
* heretofore : 지금까지
① disadvantages of experience in creative thinking
② significance of analytical thinking in gaining  insight
③ contribution of insight in forming a new  perspective
④ necessity of separating insight from analytical thinking
⑤ difficulty of acquiring in-depth knowledge from experience
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When consumers lack adequate information to make informed choices, governments frequently step in to require that firms provide information. In the United States, we are all familiar with the mandatory nutritional information placed on food products. The Securities and Exchange Commission that monitors American stock markets forces firms to meet certain reporting requirements before their stock can be listed on exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange. Such reporting helps ensure that private investors have reliable information on which to base their investment decisions. Often, however, these regulations do not work adequately, as the Enron scandal in 2001 clearly illustrates. The oil trading company Enron had cooked its books to overstate its profitability in its mandated reports. One outcome of Enron’s subsequent financial collapse was the introduction of new regulations designed to improve the reliability of the information that companies must provide to the public.
* mandatory : 의무적인 ** subsequent : (결과로서) 일어나는
① Financial Advice for Better Market Profitability
② The Emergence of New Business Opportunities
③ Ethical Stock Investment for Reliable Businesses
④ Disclosing Truth: The Push for Market Credibility
⑤ Inflated Figures: The Driving Force for Investment

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?














　The above graph shows the number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 employees in 2011 for six selected countries. ① All of the six countries have more multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive  industries than in all other industries. ② Among the countries in the graph, Japan has the largest number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries. ③ While the Republic of Korea has the smallest number of multipurpose industrial robots per  10,000 employees in automotive industries, it has the largest number in all other industries. ④ Both the USA and the United Kingdom have more than 600 units of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries  but  have fewer than 200 units in all other industries. ⑤ Among the six countries in the graph, Japan, Italy, and Germany are the  top three countries for the number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries.


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. brown tree snake에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The brown tree snake has a large head with  sticking-out eyes. The head is distinct from the narrow neck. Its body usually has a light brown background with a series of darker markings or bands on it. The snake is about 38 centimeters when it comes out of its egg, and usually reaches 1 to  2  meters long. This snake is infamous for causing the extinction of the majority of native bird species in Guam. Shortly after World War Ⅱ, the brown tree snake was accidentally brought into Guam from its native range in the  South  Pacific,  probably as an unwanted passenger on a ship or plane. It is   not hunted or eaten by any other animals in Guam and is therefore at the top of its food chain, which has led the snake  to increase dramatically in number.
① 큰 머리와 돌출된 눈을 가지고 있다.
② 일반적으로 몸 바탕색은 연한 갈색이다.
③ 알에서 나올 때 약 38센티미터이다.
④ 제2차 세계 대전 이전에 Guam으로 우연히 유입되었다.
⑤ Guam에서 먹이 사슬의 최상위에 있다.






26. Barrow High School Charity Collection Week에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Barrow High School Charity Collection Week
　Next week, we will be holding our school charity collection to help local students. We welcome donations of your gently-used items.
What to donate:
Clothes, bags, books, and small electronics
* No cash donations will be accepted.
How to donate:
Put all items into a box and write your name on it. Leave your box at the collection point in our school gym.
When to donate:
From September 18 to September 22 (during normal school hours)
　Please try to remember to show your goodwill and support! For more information, contact the school office at 0093-1234-5678.

① 지역 학생들을 돕기 위한 것이다.
② 의류, 가방, 책, 소형 전자 기기를 기부받는다.
③ 현금을 기부받는다.
④ 기부할 모든 물품은 상자에 넣어야 한다.
⑤ 9월 18일부터 기부를 받는다.
27. 
Best Booth Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

－ Gold Rose Flower Festival －
Best Booth Contest
　The Best Booth Contest is one of the main events of the Gold Rose Flower Festival. Participation in the contest is free of charge, and the best-looking booths will be chosen as winners. Please come and join in the fun!
Judging Standards
?Use of this year’s “Fantasy” theme
?Design originality
?Votes received by visitors
Prizes
?First place: $200
?Second place: $100
?Third place: $50
Contest Schedule
?Judging:  October  20－21  (Friday  &  Saturday)  from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
?Award ceremony: October 21 (Saturday) at 5:00 p.m.
Contest Registration
To register your booth, please email the festival manager at mholden@bbcgrff.org.

① 참가비가 있다.
② 심사 기준 중에 디자인 독창성 항목이 있다.
③ 1등 상금은 2등 상금의 세 배이다.
④ 시상식은 10월 20일 금요일 오후 5시에 열린다.
⑤ 이메일로는 부스 등록을 받지 않는다.


28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　The lack of real, direct experience in and with nature has caused many children to regard the natural world as mere abstraction, that fantastic, beautifully filmed place ① filled with endangered rainforests and polar bears in peril. This overstated, often fictionalized version of nature is no more real ― and yet no less real ― to them than the everyday nature right outside their doors, ② waits to be discovered in a child’s way, at a child’s pace. Consider the University of Cambridge study which found that a group of eight-year-old children was able to identify ③ substantially more characters from animations than common wildlife species. One wonders whether our children’s inherent capacity to recognize, classify, and order information about their environment ― abilities once essential to our very survival ― is slowly devolving to facilitate life in
④ their increasingly virtualized world. It’s all part of ⑤ what Robert Pyle first called “the extinction of experience.”
* peril : 위험 ** devolve : 퇴화하다



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Why does the “pure” acting of the movies not seem unnatural to the audience, who, after all, are accustomed in real life to people whose expression is more or less indistinct? Most people’s perception in these matters is not very sharp. They are not in the habit of observing closely the play of features of their fellow men ― either in real life or at the movies. They are (A) disappointed / satisfied with grasping the meaning of what they see. Thus, they often take in the overemphasized expression of film actors more easily than any that is too naturalistic. And as far as lovers of art are concerned, they do not look at the movies for imitations of nature but for art. They know that (B) artistic / real representation is always explaining, refining, and making clear the object depicted. Things that in real life are imperfectly realized, merely hinted at, and entangled with other things appear in a work of art complete, entire, and (C) free / inseparable from irrelevant matters. This is also true of acting in film.
* entangle : 얽히게 하다
(A) (B)	(C)
① disappointed   …… artistic   …… free
② disappointed   …… real        …… free
③ satisfied          …… artistic   …… inseparable
④ satisfied          …… real        …… inseparable
⑤ satisfied …… artistic …… free







30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Most of us probably parent the way we were parented. Louise, a  mother who attended  my seminars, shared how
① her mother dealt with sibling fighting. Louise said her mother’s infamous threat was always, “If you kids don’t stop fighting, ② I’m going to knock your three heads together!” Louise and her siblings were always puzzled about the specifics of how their mother would actually accomplish such  a task, which, thankfully, ③ she never attempted. But what drove her mother to make this empty threat? Extreme annoyance with the sibling arguments, probably. No doubt, Louise’s  mother  had  learned  this  threatening  tactic from
④ her own mother, and, in the absence of any other parenting tools she knew of, she said it to her own children, regardless   of whether it worked. If Louise had not learned the effective parenting skills taught in the seminars, ⑤ she would probably be using similarly ineffective threatening techniques with her own children today!
* sibling : 형제(의), 자매(의)

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. One unspoken truth about creativity ― it isn’t about wild talent so much as  it  is about 	. To find a few ideas that work, you need to try a lot that don’t. It’s a pure numbers game. Geniuses don’t necessarily have a higher success rate than other creators; they simply do more ― and they do a range of different things. They have more successes and more failures. That goes for teams and companies too. It’s impossible to generate a lot of good ideas without also generating a lot of bad ideas. The thing about creativity is that at the outset, you can’t tell which ideas will succeed and which will fail. So the only thing you can do is try to fail faster so that you can move onto the next idea.
* at the outset: 처음에
① sensitivity
② superiority
③ imagination
④ productivity
⑤ achievement















32. Let me spend a moment on the idea of adjusting to another person’s mental orientation. What I mean is this. At any moment, a  person has a 	. The person notices this rather than that, and she has feelings and makes judgements about one rather than another aspect of events. If she is hungry, for example, she may notice that a shop is selling groceries; her friend may notice only that it sells newspapers. If she is short of money, she may resent that the fruit is overpriced; meanwhile her friend may feel tempted by some juicy peaches. In one sense the two friends are experiencing the same shop and its contents, but they are having quite different experiences of that shop. A more extreme case arises when one person comprehends things in a peculiar and individual way, for instance, in mistaking the shop for a cinema. [3점]
① desire to make better choices
② point of view similar to that of others
③ personal preference on where to shop
④ particular take on what is happening
⑤ tendency to stick to traditions



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Externalization is the foundation from which many narrative conversations are built. This requires a particular shift in the use of language. Often externalizing conversations involve tracing the influence of the problem in a child’s life over time and how the problem has disempowered the child by limiting his ability to see things in a different light. The counsellor helps the child to change by deconstructing old stories and reconstructing preferred stories about himself and his life. To help the child to develop a new story, the counsellor and child search for times when the problem has not influenced the child or the child’s life and focus on the different ways the child thought, felt and behaved. These
 	 help the child create a new and preferred story. As a new and preferred story begins to emerge, it is important to assist the child to  hold on to, or stay connected to, the new story. [3점]
① exceptions to the problem story
② distances from the alternative story
③ problems that originate from the counsellor
④ efforts to combine old and new experiences
⑤ methods of linking the child’s stories to another’s









34. The narratives that people create to understand their landscapes come to be viewed as marketable entities and a source of income for residents. Landscapes with a strong place identity have an advantage in marketing to tourists, as it is relatively easy to compartmentalize and market their narratives. Such places may have disadvantages as well, however. If place identity is tied to a particular industry, local residents may feel strongly attached to the definitions of place that stem from involvement in that industry, and they may
 	  in favor of one based on a tourism industry. People rooted in landscape may feel strong connections to other community members and may resent the invasion of outsiders who they believe are different and challenge their common identity. Finally, local residents may feel that this process reduces their identities to mere commercial transactions, and they may believe they sacrifice what is unique and special about their place. [3점]
* entity : 실재 ** compartmentalize : 구획하다 *** transaction : 거래
① resist losing that identity
② stop persisting with the old tie
③ tolerate the shift of that industry
④ alienate themselves from that place
⑤ refuse the advantage of that industry
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　One of the hallmarks of evaluating the quality of a black tea is by assessing how tightly the leaves are rolled. Generally, higher-graded teas are teas with leaves that are tightly and uniformly rolled. ① Lower-graded teas, on the other hand, are teas  with  leaves  that  are  loosely  and  inconsistently rolled.
② With that said, the tightness of the roll has more to do with the steepability of a leaf than it does with the taste of a tea.
③ The rolling of leaves is done by machine or, sometimes, by hand to break the cell walls of the  leaves  and  release  essential oils. ④ Therefore, one should not evaluate the tea’s drinkability or taste merely because its leaves are not tightly rolled. ⑤ It is common to find that people prefer the taste of looser rolled black teas over more expensive or more highly graded black teas that have been tightly rolled.
* hallmark: 특징, 특질  ** steepability : (차를) 우려낼 수 있음






[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) You may have had this experience if you have been reading a book and then suddenly become aware that although you were moving your eyes across the page and “reading” the words, you had no idea what you had just read.
(B) Even though you were looking at the words, you apparently were not paying attention. There is a mental aspect of attention that involves processing that can occur independently of eye movements.
(C) We can pay attention to things that are not directly in our line of vision, as evidenced by the basketball player who dribbles down court while paying attention to a teammate off to the side, just before she throws a perfect pass without looking. We can also look directly at something without paying attention to it.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.




(A) Inventions, ideas, and discoveries have been credited to the persons who originated them. This view is also at the core of the definition of an “artist.” Artists are perceived to establish a strong bond with their art to the point of combining into one “entity.”
(B) In contrast to the diversity it is applied to, the meaning of this term continues to be mostly based on Western views and values. Since the fifteenth century, this tradition has been concerned with recognizing individual achievements.
(C) Art history has reinforced this oneness: A painting by Pablo Picasso is called “a Picasso.” This union between artists and their work has determined the essential qualities of an artist: originality, authorship, and authenticity. [3점]
* authenticity : 진정함, 확실성
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)










[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
There are many instances of rapid work on the part of the great composers; and their facility and quickness of composition causes great wonder and admiration. ( ① ) But our admiration is often misdirected. ( ② ) When we hear of some of the speedy writing of great works by Mozart or Mendelssohn, we might think that this speed was of the composing power as well as of pen, but, in fact, such was seldom the case. ( ③ ) These great musicians generally did their composition mentally without reference to pen or piano, and simply postponed the unpleasant manual labor of committing their music to paper until it became absolutely necessary. (  ④ ) Then they got credit for incredible rapidity  of composition. ( ⑤ ) One has only to copy a piece of music  or to try to put into notes some piece of music previously memorized, to realize this. [3점]


40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The one area in which the Internet could be considered an  aid to  thinking is  the rapid  acquisition  of new information. ( ① ) But this is more fictional than real. ( ② ) Yes,  the simple act of typing a few words into a search engine will virtually instantaneously produce links related to the topic at hand. ( ③ ) What one often gets is no more than abstract summaries of lengthy articles. ( ④ ) As a consequence, I suspect that the number of downloads of any given scientific paper has little relevance to the number of times the entire article has been read from beginning to end. ( ⑤ ) My advice is that if you want to do some serious thinking, then you’d better disconnect the Internet, phone, and television set and try spending twenty-four hours in absolute solitude.







(A) (B)
① loose	……	profit
② loose	……	stem
③ loose	……	withdraw
④ close	……	profit
⑤ close	……	stem



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 














(C) 
　Since these jobs were not fishing, his father saw no value in them. Young Ricky hated fishing. Everything would be fine if it were not fishing, he thought to himself. Soon, Ricky began to follow his older brother who used to play sandlot ball. For Ricky, playing baseball with (c) him was a way to forget his hardship. Fortunately, Ricky was very good at it, and was treated like a hero among his playmates. When Ricky was sixteen, he decided to drop out of school to become a baseball player. And by the time he was through with baseball, (d) he had become a legend.
* sandlot ball : 동네야구
(D) 













41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Giving Land Back to Nature for Ecological Balance
② Colonisation: Mother Nature’s Shame or Pride?
③ Broken Ecosystems: Mankind’s Misconduct
④ Is Set-Aside Land Economically Desirable?
⑤ The Paradox of Eco-Friendly Farming

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① assessment	② competition	③ constancy
④ forces	⑤ management

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　An important lesson to remember is that we should try to see the positives in life even while we are stuck in the middle of trouble. Riccardo, who was named after his father, an immigrant from Mexico, learned this lesson at a young age. Although the family called him Ricky, his father had his own nickname for him: Good-for-Nothing. Why did the elder Riccardo call (a) him that? Because Ricky hated fishing.



43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Ricky에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지의 이름을 따서 Riccardo라고 이름 지어졌다.
② 야구 선수로 성공했지만 아버지가 자랑스러워하지 않았다.
③ 야구 선수가 되기 위해 학교를 그만두기로 결심했다.
④ 아버지의 직업이 어부였다.
⑤ 힘든 일을 두려워하지 않았다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2017학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Actually, Mom’s not here.
② Yes, he’s coming home soon.
③ Right. I won’t go to the party.
④ No, we didn’t order the gift yet.
⑤ Great. Let’s buy one at the store.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll never be late for class again.
② Right. You’ve got lots of time to finish.
③ Really? I’d better get started right away.
④ What? I’ve already written up the report.
⑤ I see. I hope you can finish yours by tomorrow.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학생회장 선거를 홍보하려고
② 교통 봉사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 무단 횡단 자제를 당부하려고
④ 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 주차 문제 해결을 촉구하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 점심시간 중 여가 활동의 장점
② 직장 동료들과 잘 지내는 방법
③ 스트레스 해소와 건강과의 관계
④ 독서가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
⑤ 밴드 공연 시 악기 구성의 중요성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 아나운서 － 리포터
② 출판업자 － 소설가
③ 신문 편집자 － 만화가
④ 잡지 기자 － 문학 비평가
⑤ 영화 제작자 － 시나리오 작가



7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 예약 날짜 변경하기	② 할인 쿠폰 출력하기
③ 레스토랑 예약하기	④ 기념사진 촬영하기
⑤ 저녁상 차리기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 조퇴하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 운전면허 시험에 응시하려고
② 동생을 집에 데려다 주려고
③ 부모님 댁을 방문하려고
④ 병원 진료를 받으려고
⑤ 워크숍에 참석하려고

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $270	② $290	③ $300	④ $320	⑤ $360

10. 대화를  듣고, Sunrise  Korean  Folk  Village   관광에  관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 체험 활동 내용	② 참가 비용
③ 식사 포함 여부	④ 참가 인원수
⑤ 소요 시간

11. Pine Tree Family Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Evergreen  호숫가에 위치하고 있다.
② 두 달 전에 새롭게 단장했다.
③ 1인당 입장료를 인하했다.
④ 셔틀버스를 30분마다 운행한다.
⑤ 공원 크기를 늘렸다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 침낭을 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
② Sure. Let’s go to the rock concert together.
③ I agree. The advanced level is right for you.
④ You’re doing a good job. We’re almost there.
⑤ Come on! Once you see it, you’ll want to try it.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Right. We can’t ignore complaints about the staff.
② Of course. Air conditioners will be very expensive.
③ Yeah, but it’s important to keep our students happy.
④ Then, I’ll teach you how to use the computer program.
⑤ Really? Sorry to hear the computer classes will be closed.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mike가 Susan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Mike:   	
① I had a great time shopping at the market.
② I wouldn’t change my mind if I were you.
③ You can repair your camera at the department store.
④ You should go to the department store this weekend.
⑤ I wish I had gone to the electronics market with you.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects and uses of colors
② functions and uses of shapes
③ ways of constructing buildings
④ types and purposes of buildings
⑤ color preferences and personalities

17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① 은행	② 호텔	③ 병원	④ 학교	⑤ 사무실


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 자원 봉사 참가를 취소하려고
② CD를 보내 줄 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 신청서에 기입한 주소를 수정하려고
④ 양서류 생태 조사 일정을 확인하려고
⑤ 오리엔테이션에 참석할 수 없음을 알리려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘she’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When she heard the dogs barking fiercely on the floor just above her, she trembled uncontrollably for fear of being caught. Drops of cold sweat rolled down her back. Before slipping into the hold of the boat, she had scattered powder, which Swedish scientists had developed, unnoticeably on the floor above in order to distract the dogs. But she knew that these dogs were so well trained that they could smell her, even though a load of fish had been dumped over her hiding place. She held her hands together tightly and tried not to make any noise. She was not sure how long she could stay like that. To her relief, it wasn’t long before a whistle called the dogs out, leaving her unfound. She relaxed her hands and  exhaled  a deep breath. She felt safe now.
① terrified	→  relieved	② delighted → frustrated
③ scared	→  annoyed	④ bored	→ excited
⑤ disappointed → exhausted

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Have you ever met someone while you were experiencing significant emotional, psychological, or physical stress? Perhaps you stayed up all night studying for a final, or maybe you learned that a grandparent recently died. You likely exhibited behaviors that are not consistent with how you usually act. Meeting someone when you  are  extremely stressed can create an inaccurate impression of you. For this reason, recognize that our first impressions of others also may be perceptual errors. To help avoid committing these errors, engage in perception checking, which means that we consider  a series of questions to confirm or challenge our perceptions   of others and their behaviors. For example, see if you can provide two possible interpretations for the verbal and nonverbal behavior observed and seek clarification of it in order to determine the accuracy of your evaluation.
① 상대방에 대한 자신의 인식에 오류가 없는지 점검하라.
② 정신적 스트레스가 심할 때는 타인과의 만남을 피하라.
③ 처음 만나는 사람에게 좋은 인상을 주도록 노력하라.
④ 상대방의 심리를 파악하고 자신의 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 언어적 행동과 비언어적 행동을 일치시켜라.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When we see a happy face (or an angry one), it subtly generates the corresponding emotion in us. To the degree we take on the pace, posture, and facial expression of another person, we start to inhabit their emotional space; as our body mimics the other’s, we begin to experience emotional matching. Our nervous system is automatically set to engage  in this emotional empathy. But how well we use this capacity  is largely a learned ability. Animals－and people－who have been raised in extreme social isolation are poor at reading emotional cues in those around them not because they lack the basic circuitry for empathy but because, lacking emotional tutors, they have never learned to pay attention to these messages and so haven’t practiced this skill.
① 긍정적인 감정은 더 많은 공감을 불러일으킨다.
② 사람과 동물은 모방하는 능력에서 차이를 보인다.
③ 타인과 공감하는 능력을 잘 사용하려면 학습이 필요하다.
④ 얼굴 표정은 상대방의 감정을 파악하는 중요한 단서이다.
⑤ 인간이 타인과 공감하는 정도는 신경계에 의해 결정된다.












22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When we hear a story, we look for beliefs that are being commented upon. Any story has many possible  beliefs inherent in it. But how does someone listening to a story find those beliefs? We find them by looking through the beliefs we already have. We are not as concerned with what we are hearing as we are with finding what we already know that is relevant. Picture it in this way. As understanders, we have a  list of beliefs, indexed by subject area. When a new story appears, we attempt to find a belief of ours that relates to it. When we do, we find a story attached to that belief and compare the story in our memory to the one  we  are processing. Our understanding of the new story becomes, at that point, a function of the old story. Once we find a belief  and connected story, we need no further processing; that is,   the search for other beliefs stops.
① the use of a new story in understanding an old story
② the limits of our memory capacity in recalling stories
③ the influence of new stories on challenging our beliefs
④ the most efficient strategy to improve storytelling skills
⑤ the role of our existing beliefs in comprehending a new story
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Savannas pose a bit of a problem for ecologists. There is an axiom in ecology that ‘complete competitors cannot coexist’: in other words, where two populations of organisms use exactly the same resources, one would be expected to do so slightly more efficiently than the other and therefore come to dominate in the long term. In temperate parts of the world, either trees dominate (in forests) or grasses dominate (in grasslands). Yet, in savannas grasses and trees coexist. The classic explanation proposes that trees have deep roots while grasses have shallow roots. The two plant types are therefore able to coexist because they are not in fact competitors: the trees increase in wetter climates and on sandier soils because more water is able to penetrate to the deep roots. Trees do indeed have a few small roots which penetrate to great depth, but most of their roots are in the top half-metre of the soil, just where the grass roots are.
* axiom: 원리, 공리
① A War at Hand Between Plants in Savannas
② A Rivalry for Wetter Soils among Savanna Trees
③ Are Savannas a Hidden Treasure of Bio-Diversity?
④ Cyclic Dominance of Trees over Grasses in Savannas
⑤ Strange Companions: Savanna Plants Confuse Ecologists

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?













　The graph above shows the Western Hemisphere oil production per day in 2010 and proven oil reserves as of 2011 for selected countries. ① The United States recorded 9.65 million barrels of daily oil production in 2010, the greatest daily oil production among the countries shown on the graph.
② Canada had the second largest daily oil production followed by Mexico and Brazil, with Venezuela recording the lowest among the five countries in 2010. ③ As for proven oil reserves, however, Venezuela recorded the largest amount among these countries in 2011, possessing 211.2 billion barrels, followed by Canada with 175.2 billion barrels. ④ In 2011, the sum of the proven oil reserves of the United States, Mexico, and Brazil was greater than those of Venezuela. ⑤ Brazil had larger proven oil reserves than Mexico in 2011, but the daily oil production of Brazil was lower than that of Mexico in 2010.
* proven oil reserves: 확인된 석유 매장량


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Sequoyah에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian, was born in about 1770 in Taskigi, now in Tennessee. Raised by his Cherokee mother,  the young Sequoyah never learned to read or write English. While interacting with English speakers, he realized the necessity of a writing system for the Cherokee people. In  about 1809, Sequoyah began developing a system of writing, adapting letters from English, Greek, and Hebrew. By 1821,  he had created a system of 86 symbols, representing all the syllables of the Cherokee language. The Cherokee people began to use the system in their schools and publish books   and newspapers in their language. In 1824, the General  Council of the Eastern Cherokees awarded Sequoyah a medal in honor of his accomplishment. Sequoyah moved to  Oklahoma some years later and died in what is now Texas in 1843. And later, people remembered him by naming a certain tree species “Sequoia.”
* syllable: 음절
① 1770년경 Taskigi에서 태어났다.
② 어린 시절에 영어를 읽고 쓰는 법을 배웠다.
③ Cherokee  사람들을 위한 문자 체계의 필요성을 깨달았다.
④ 업적을 인정받아 1824년에 메달을 받았다.
⑤ 1843년에 지금의 Texas에서 세상을 떠났다.

26. Kingston Badminton Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Kingston Badminton Program
　Are you looking for a simple and effective sports program? Then check out the Kingston Badminton Program and choose one of our courses taught by the most experienced badminton coaches.
?Course   sessions   will   be   held   three   days   a   week (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) for 4 weeks  from June 20 to July 15.
3:00 p.m.－4:00 p.m.: Ages 7－10
4:30 p.m.－5:30 p.m.: Ages 11－14 6:00 p.m.－7:00 p.m.: Ages 15 and up
?The tuition fee is $50 per person with a free personal locker.
?The deadline for registration is June 10.
?Badminton rackets and shuttlecocks are provided.
　For further information, call the Kingston Community Center at 322－480－5267.

① 일주일에 3일씩 4주 동안 운영된다.
② 오후 6시에는 15세 이상을 대상으로 진행된다.
③ 개인용 사물함을 이용하려면 추가 비용이 든다.
④ 등록 마감일은 6월 10일이다.
⑤ 배드민턴 라켓과 셔틀콕을 제공한다.
27. 
16th Springvale Book Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

16th Springvale Book Festival
Saturday, June 4, 10 a.m.－5 p.m.
　　Springvale Public Library (4536 Main Street, Springvale, WI)
　Mark your calendar for the 16th Springvale Book Festival. This is your big chance to meet the nation’s BEST authors and discuss their works.
　Authors will be speaking at the main hall on the 2nd floor from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
Note: Authors will be signing books in the lobby, so please bring your own personal copies or you can purchase books on site.
　Get the most out of your big day by downloading the festival  app at our website (www.spvbf.org). It features  a complete list of all events & locations, maps, and ways to share it all via social media.
All programs will be FREE of charge!
　Please visit our website for more  information about the festival.

① 6월 4일부터 5일간 개최된다.
② 작가들의 강연이 오전에 예정되어 있다.
③ 행사장에서 구매한 책에 한정하여 작가들이 사인을 해 준다.
④ 웹 사이트에서 행사 정보 앱(app)을 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 일부 프로그램의 경우 입장료를 지불해야 한다.



28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　If an animal is innately programmed for some type of behaviour, then there ① are likely to be biological clues. It is no accident that fish have bodies which are streamlined and
② smooth, with fins and a powerful tail. Their bodies are structurally adapted for moving fast through the water. Similarly, if you found a dead bird or mosquito, you could guess by looking at ③ its wings that flying was its normal mode of transport. However, we must not be over-optimistic. Biological clues are not essential. The extent to which they are
④ finding varies from animal to animal and from activity to activity. For example, it is impossible to guess from their bodies that birds make nests, and, sometimes, animals behave in a way quite contrary to ⑤ what might be expected from their physical form: ghost spiders have tremendously long  legs, yet they weave webs out of very short threads. To a human observer, their legs seem a great hindrance as they spin and move about the web.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　In 2001, researchers at Wayne State University asked a  group of college volunteers to exercise for twenty minutes at a
(A) preset / self-selected pace on each of three machines: a treadmill, a stationary bike, and a stair climber. Measurements of heart rate, oxygen consumption, and perceived effort were taken throughout all three workouts. The researchers expected to find that the subjects unconsciously targeted the same relative physiological intensity in each activity. Perhaps they would (B) automatically / intentionally exercise at 65 percent of their maximum heart rate regardless of which machine they were using. Or maybe they would instinctively settle into rhythm at 70 percent of their maximum rate of oxygen consumption in all three workouts. But that’s not what happened. There was, in fact, no (C)  consistency / variation   in measurements of heart rate and oxygen consumption across the three disciplines. Instead, the subjects were found to have chosen the same level of perceived effort on the treadmill, the bike, and the stair climber.
* treadmill: 러닝머신
** physiological: 생리학적인
(A) (B)	(C)
① preset	…… intentionally …… consistency
② preset	…… automatically   …… variation
③ self-selected   …… intentionally    …… variation
④ self-selected   …… intentionally    …… consistency
⑤ self-selected   …… automatically   …… consistency




30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　In the summer of 1972, the actor Anthony Hopkins was signed to play a leading role in a film based on  George  Feifer’s novel The Girl from Petrovka. That is why ① he traveled to London to buy a copy of the book. Unfortunately, none of the main London bookstores had a copy. Then, on his way home, waiting for an underground train at Leicester Square tube station, he saw a discarded book lying on the seat next to ② him. It was a copy of The Girl from Petrovka. As if that was not coincidence enough, more was to follow. Later, when ③ he had a chance to meet the author, Hopkins told him about this strange occurrence. Feifer was interested. He said to
④ him that in November 1971 he had lent a friend a copy of the book?a unique copy in which he had made notes on turning the British English into American English for the publication of an American version?but his friend had lost  the copy in London. A quick check of the copy Hopkins had found showed that it was the very same copy that ⑤ his friend had mislaid.

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Once a hand or gripper has been directed to an object by reaching, it can be grasped. Grasping requires that fingers hold an object securely. A secure grip is one in which the object won’t slip or move, especially when displaced by an external force. Your grasp on a hammer, for example, would not be secure if knocking against something caused you to drop it. One precondition of a firm grasp is that the forces applied by the fingers balance each other so as not to disturb the object’s position. The characteristics of an object such as its geometric configuration and mass distribution may demand that some fingers apply greater force than others to maintain 	. The grasp and support forces must also match overall object mass and fragility. An egg requires a more delicate touch than a rock. [3점]
* geometric configuration:  기하학적 형태
** fragility: 부서지기 쉬움
① distance	② efficiency
③ mobility	④ direction
⑤ stability







32. What story could be harsher than that of the Great Auk, the large black-and-white seabird that in northern oceans took the ecological place of a penguin? Its tale rises and falls like a Greek tragedy, with island populations savagely destroyed by humans until almost all were gone. Then the very last colony found safety on a special island, one protected from the destruction of humankind by vicious and unpredictable ocean currents. These waters presented no problem to perfectly adapted seagoing birds, but they prevented humans from making any kind of safe landing. After enjoying a few years   of comparative safety, disaster of a different kind struck the Great Auk. Volcanic activity caused the island refuge to sink
completely beneath the waves, and surviving individuals were forced to find shelter elsewhere. The new island home they chose 	in one terrible way. Humans could access it with comparative ease, and they did! Within just a few years the last of this once-plentiful species was entirely eliminated. [3점]
* savagely: 잔혹하게
① lacked the benefits of the old
② denied other colonies easy access
③ faced unexpected natural disasters
④ caused conflicts among the refugees
⑤ had a similar disadvantage to the last island




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. It is not hard to see that a strong economy, where opportunities	are	plentiful	and	jobs	go	begging,
 	. Biased employers may still dislike hiring members of one group or another, but when nobody else is available, discrimination most  often  gives way to the basic need to get the work done. The same goes for employees with prejudices about whom they do and do not like working alongside. In the American construction boom of the late 1990s, for example, even the carpenters’ union?long known as a “traditional bastion of white men, a world where a coveted union card was handed down from father to son”?began openly encouraging women,  blacks,  and Hispanics to join its internship program. At least in the workplace, jobs chasing people obviously does more to promote a fluid society than people chasing jobs. [3점]
* bastion: 요새
** coveted: 부러움을 사는
① allows employees to earn more income
② helps break down social barriers
③ simplifies the hiring process
④ increases wage discrimination
⑤ improves the productivity of a company



34. One remarkable aspect of aboriginal culture is the concept of “totemism,” where the tribal member at birth assumes the soul and identity of a part of nature. This view of the earth and its riches as an intrinsic part of oneself clearly rules out mistreatment of the environment because this would only constitute a destruction of self. Totems are more than objects. They include spiritual rituals, oral histories, and the organization of ceremonial lodges where records of the past travel routes of the soul can be exchanged with others and converted to mythology. The primary motivation is the preservation of tribal myths and a consolidation and sharing of every individual’s origins in nature. The aborigines see
 	, through a hierarchy of totems that connect to their ancestral origins, a cosmology that places them at one with the earth, and behavior patterns that respect ecological balance. [3점]
* aboriginal: 원주민의
** consolidation:  병합, 강화
① themselves as incompatible with nature and her riches
② their mythology as a primary motive toward individualism
③ their identity as being self-contained from surrounding nature
④ their relationship to the environment as a single harmonious continuum
⑤ their communal rituals as a gateway to distancing themselves from their origins
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Roles are like a fence. They allow us a certain amount of freedom, but for most of us that freedom doesn’t go very far. Suppose that a woman decides that she is not going to wear dresses?or a man that he will not wear suits and ties? regardless of what anyone says. ① In most situations, they’ll stick to their decision. ② When a formal occasion comes along, however, such as a family wedding or a funeral, they  are likely to cave in to norms that they find overwhelming.
③ The increasing social pressure discourages us from fulfilling the social norms and committing ourselves to shared social conventions of behaviour. ④ Almost all of us follow  the guidelines for what is “appropriate” for our roles. ⑤ Few of us are bothered by such restrictions, for our socialization is so thorough that we usually want to do what our roles indicate is appropriate.






[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 
　The ancient Greeks sought to improve memory through brain training methods such as memory palaces and the method of loci. At the same time, they and the Egyptians became experts at externalizing information, inventing the modern library, a grand storehouse for externalized knowledge.

(A) This need isn’t simply learned; it is a biological imperative? animals organize their environments instinctively. Most mammals are biologically programmed to put their digestive waste away from where they eat and sleep.
(B) We don’t know why these simultaneous explosions of intellectual activity occurred when they did (perhaps daily human experience had hit a certain level of complexity). But the human need to organize our lives, our environment, even our thoughts, remains strong.
(C) Dogs have been known to collect their toys and put them in baskets; ants carry off dead members of the colony to burial grounds; certain birds and rodents create barriers around their nests in order to more easily detect invaders.
* method of loci: 장소를 활용한 기억법
** rodent:  설치류 동물
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) In the early 1950s, Imo, a one-year-old female macaque, somehow hit upon the idea of washing her sweet potatoes in a stream before eating them. Soon it was hard to find a Koshima macaque who wasn’t careful to wash off her sweet potato before eating it.
(B) Imo, though, realized that if you threw a handful of wheat and sand into the ocean, the sand would sink and  the wheat would float. Again, within a few years most of her fellow macaques were throwing wheat and sand into the sea and obtaining the benefits.
(C) A few years later, Imo introduced another innovation. Researchers on the island occasionally gave the monkeys wheat (in addition to sweet potatoes). But the wheat was given to them on the beach, where it quickly became mixed with sand.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
The customer service representatives in an electronics firm under major restructuring were told they had to begin selling service contracts for their equipment in addition to installing and  repairing them. This generated  a great deal of resistance.  ( ① ) To the service representatives, learning to sell was a  very different game from what they had been playing. ( ② ) But it turned out they already knew a lot more about sales   than they thought. ( ③ ) The same is true in selling. ( ④ )  The salesperson first has to learn  about the customer’s needs.  ( ⑤ ) The service representatives also had a great deal of product knowledge and hands-on experience, which is obviously important in sales.


40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　In humans, body clocks are responsible for daily changes in blood pressure, body temperature, hormones, hunger, and thirst, as well as our sleep-wake cycles. ( ① ) These biological rhythms, which we experience as internal time, are probably older than sleep, developed over the course of millions of years of evolution. ( ② ) They facilitate physiological and behavioral changes on a roughly twenty-four-hour cycle no matter what is happening outside, whether a cold front moves in or clouds block the light of the sun. ( ③ ) Their internal clocks continue to run in accordance with the place they left behind, not the one to which they have come, and it can take some time to realign the two. ( ④ ) The most remarkable thing is that our internal body clocks can be readjusted by environmental cues. ( ⑤ ) We may get jet lag for a few days when we ask our body clocks to adapt to a vastly different schedule of day and night cycles on the other side of the Earth, but they can do it. [3점]
* facilitate:  쉽게 하다
** realign: 재조정하다











(A) (B)
① objectively …… weaken
② objectively …… support
③ accurately …… clarify
④ selectively …… strengthen
⑤ selectively …… disprove



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 

































41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Early Development of Intellectual Property Protection
② History of Roman Intellectual Property Law
③ How the Romans Protected Their Properties
④ Increasing Demand to Protect Ancient Artifacts
⑤ Why Trademarks Were Exploited in Early Civilizations

42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A) (B)
① recognize …… valuable
② recognize …… outdated
③ honor	…… ignorable
④ suspend	…… imitable
⑤ suspend	…… significant

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Richard was watching people on the street through the window. Skirts were bouncing lightly and  pants  were dancing delightedly in the seasonable weather as the spring breeze chased them playfully. Some seemed excited, walking like racing cars between passersby. He had ordered  two  black coffees, one for himself and one for his friend, Julie. She was running late, but the service was fast. The hot  coffees were promptly placed in front of (a) him.

(C)
　Looking at the coffees, Richard remembered that Julie  liked whipped cream on top of her hot coffee. He was wondering if it was better  to put the cream on now, or wait till she arrived. “Since the cream is cold, it’ll cool down the coffee faster,” he reasoned. Beep! It was a text message from her. “I’ll be there in 5 minutes. Please put some cream on my coffee.” He was startled, because she seemed to know what he was thinking about. (d) Richard called over a waiter wearing a blue shirt and asked him for whipped cream.
(D)
　Richard thanked the waiter. Following his instructions, Richard made a flower with the cream. He tried to be as precise as he could. No sooner had he completed his masterpiece, Julie stepped into the cafe. As she sat down, she saw her coffee. “Wow, look at that! A white flower in the cup! It looks so beautiful, Richard! It’s too lovely to drink,” his friend said. “Try it,” (e) the happy man urged her. She tasted it. “This coffee is absolutely delicious, too!” Talking and laughing over coffee, they enjoyed the fabulous spring day.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Richard에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 어느 봄날 카페에서 길거리의 사람들을 바라보았다.
② 자신과 Julie를 위해 뜨거운 커피를 두 잔 주문했다.
③ 커피와 크림에 대해 웨이터와 대화를 나누었다.
④ 크림을 넣을지 알아보기 위해 Julie에게 문자를 보냈다.
⑤ Julie가 마실 커피 위에 꽃 모양을 만들었다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2017학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
1




6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I feel much better now.
② I’ll drive you to the hospital.
③ The water is too cold to drink.
④ Winter is your favorite season.
⑤ I hope your sister will be okay soon.



2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① All right. I can give you a hand.
② Thank you. I appreciate your help.
③ Great. You’ve passed the math test.
④ Right. There’s a lot of work at home.
⑤ Sure. You’ve studied chemistry so hard.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 주민 만족도 조사에 참여를 부탁하려고
② 마을 벽화 그리기 프로젝트를 홍보하려고
③ 주차장 확장 공사 일정 변경을 안내하려고
④ 페인트 작업에 따른 주민 협조를 요청하려고
⑤ 아파트 승강기 안전 점검 계획을 공지하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 동아리 활동은 진로 탐색에 유익하다.
② 통학 버스 운영 시간 연장이 시급하다.
③ 기숙사 신청 절차의 간소화가 필요하다.
④ 적성을 고려한 대학 전공 선택이 중요하다.
⑤ 기숙사에서 사는 것이 대학 생활에 도움이 된다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 비행기 승무원 ? 승객	② 교통경찰 ? 운전자
③ 영양사 ? 운동선수	④ 식당 주인 ? 손님
⑤ 의사 ? 환자

7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사진 촬영하기	② 자외선 차단제 준비하기
③ 아이들 깨우기	④ 과일과 간식 구입하기
⑤ 샌드위치 만들기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 강아지를 기를 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 집이 너무 좁아서
② 알레르기가 있어서
③ 부모님이 싫어해서
④ 비용을 감당할 수 없어서
⑤ 출장으로 집을 자주 비워서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $80	② $90	③ $100	④ $110	⑤ $120

10. 대화를 듣고, 영화 Futurist에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 줄거리	② 제작 기간
③ 특수 효과	④ 개봉 날짜
⑤ 주연 배우

1 . Kalson Island에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 18세기에 처음으로 발견되었다.
② 20년 전에 국립공원이 되었다.
③ 세계에서 가장 큰 모래섬 중 하나이다.
④ 수영을 할 수 있는 호수가 있다.
⑤ 일 년 내내 캠핑을 즐길 수 있다.




2 영어 영역

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구매할 책 세트를 고르시오.
Book Sets for Kids

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① What a coincidence! I watched that play yesterday.
② Don’t worry. You’ve already prepared a lot for that role.
③ Amazing! I cannot believe you finally became a director.
④ Never mind. This ticket for the musical wasn’t expensive.
⑤ Sounds great. Students would know the audition time easily.


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I don’t agree with you. We’ve never fixed it before.
② Okay. Let’s buy a new one as soon as possible.
③ Sounds great. You’ve got ten more clients.
④ You shouldn’t have missed that meeting.
⑤ I’ll put the clean clothes in the dryer.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Amy가 Daniel에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Amy:  	
① Do you know the process of making cheese from milk?
② Can you give me the recipe for your cheesecake?
③ What do you want to get for your birthday?
④ How about trying to make a different cake?
⑤ Would you like to have some cheesecake?

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① evolving roles of science museums
② negative effects of technology on life
③ various applications of artificial intelligence
④ desirable places for educational field trips
⑤ recent studies on human intelligence

17. 언급된 장소가 아닌 것은?
① 집	② 병원	③ 학교	④ 은행	⑤ 공장





① 입학 관련 서류를 안내하려고
② 추천서 작성 부탁을 거절하려고
③ 지역사회 활동 참여를 권유하려고
④ 장학금 신청 승인 여부를 알려주려고
⑤ 학부모 행사 취소에 대해 사과하려고




19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One of the most difficult things many successful people do is to challenge their own beliefs. Convictions that may have once been true and useful may change. Friedrich Nietzsche said it well when he said, “It’s not simply a question of having the courage of one’s convictions, but at times having the courage to attack one’s convictions.” That’s how you grow. That’s how you mature. That’s how you develop. Look at Tolstoy himself, a great example of a man who was willing to grow because he realized that he had to attack, at times, his own convictions. Socrates said it well when he said, “The unexamined life is not worth living.” But we need to add that the examined life is painful, risky, full of vulnerability. And, yet, to revitalize public conversation, we have to ensure that self-criticism and self-correction are accented in our individual lives, as well as in our society and world.
① 성장을 위해 자신의 신념에 도전하라.
② 성공을 위해 역경을 밑거름으로 삼으라.
③ 타인의 비판에 대해 수용적 태도를 가지라.
④ 타인을 비판하기 전에 자신을 먼저 돌아보라.
⑤ 자신의 신념을 실행에 옮기는 용기를 키우라.






20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

영어 영역	3
2 . 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Why do we need to routinely have the oil changed in our automobiles? Why do we need to see our dentist twice a year? The simple answer to these questions is preventative maintenance. How many times have you heard of stories where people ignored the warning signs and adverse situations seemed to present themselves overnight? A friend of mine knew there was a nail in one of his front tires, but there didn’t seem to be any obvious damage to the tire. He chose to ignore the nail until he found himself on the side of the highway with a flat tire. He later told me that before he experienced the embarrassment of having a flat, he “planned on getting it fixed when he had the time”. If he would have only taken a few minutes to get the nail removed, he most likely would not have received a flat tire on that particular day.
① 문제 발생을 막기 위해 사전 예방이 필요하다.
② 안전 장비 착용을 의무화하는 것이 중요하다.
③ 사고 발생 시 침착한 대응이 바람직하다.
④ 어려운 일은 여럿이 함께 해결하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 안전사고 예방에 대한 철저한 교육이 요구된다.








21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One of the reasons for difficulty in achieving one’s optimal weight is poor nutrient timing. When you eat is almost as important as what you eat, because the same nutrients have different effects on the body when consumed at different times. The body’s energy needs change throughout the day. It’s important to concentrate your food intake during those times when your body’s energy needs are greatest and not to consume more calories than your body needs to meet its immediate energy needs at any time. When you consume calories at times of peak energy need, most of them are used to fuel your muscles and nervous system, to synthesize muscle tissue, and to replenish muscle fuel stores. When you consume more calories than you need at any time, those excess calories will be stored as body fat.
* replenish: 다시 채우다
① the effects of nutrient timing on psychological states
② the roles of essential nutrients to improve your health
③ the correlation between slow eating and calorie intake
④ the benefits of maintaining optimal weight for your health
⑤ the importance of nutrient timing to reach optimal weight
　
The words you speak to someone may have the potential to make or break that person, so it is important to choose words carefully. When it comes to benefitting the talk you intend to have with others, this becomes even more important. If you are someone who just says whatever crosses your mind without thinking about how those words might be taken by others, then you are setting yourself up for failure as a small talker. Most people keep away from people they consider too blunt and some will be even brave enough to leave your company if you are insensitive. Careful choice of words means that you would have thought about what you are going to say beforehand. Besides helping you keep the small talk going, thinking before speaking also helps prevent you from saying some embarrassing things you may end up wishing you could swallow.
① Never Let Your Friends Get Lonely
② Careful Listening: The Key to Success
③ Small Talk as an Effective Ice-Breaker
④ Be Mindful Before You Say Something
⑤ Silence Is Better Than Meaningless Words











23. 다음 글에 드러난 Kara의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Stepping off the plane, Kara let the heat sink into her bones. Breathing in the new air, she felt the kind of excitement that only new beginnings could offer. With the phone number of a professional surfer from her flight folded in her pocket, she felt the promise of an exciting new life. She grabbed a cab to her new apartment, one that she’d found online ― just close enough to campus that she could walk, but far enough that she didn’t feel she’d be overwhelmed by campus events. She looked happily out the window, welcoming the warm air and hot sun on her face, and at the palm trees and sidewalks full of athletic people running, skateboarding, and casually hanging out with friends. She couldn’t wait to get to the beach to start making friends.
① relieved and grateful
② bored and indifferent
③ frustrated and helpless
④ ashamed and embarrassed
⑤ anticipating and delighted




4	영어 영역

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
How Often Did Americans Eat at Fast Food Restaurants?


　The graph above shows how often Americans ate at fast food restaurants in 2006 and 2013. ① Respondents who ate at fast food restaurants every day took up the smallest proportion with 3% both in 2006 and 2013. ② Compared to 2006, the percentage of respondents who ate at fast food restaurants several times a week and the percentage of those who did about once a week decreased in 2013. ③ In 2006, the percentage of respondents reporting that they ate at fast food restaurants about once a week was the largest, accounting for 33%. ④ In 2013, the percentage of respondents who ate at fast food restaurants once or twice a month was less than twice that of respondents who said that they did a few times a year.
⑤ The percentages of respondents who never ate at fast food restaurants in 2006 and 2013 were equal to each other.

25. Frank Lloyd Wright에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Frank Lloyd Wright was born on June 8, 1867 in Wisconsin. During his childhood, Wright fell in love with the rolling landscape. This inspired him as an architect to incorporate a more organic feel into his buildings. While in college, Wright worked with an architect in order to pay his tuition. Upon discovering his own passion and talent for the subject, he dropped out of school and went to work for an architectural firm in Chicago. He eventually parted ways with the firm and began designing a series of public buildings and private residences that earned him fame, including an earthquake-proof hotel in Tokyo. Due to the Great Depression, Lloyd stepped back from designing and began writing and teaching. Later, he returned to the scene and designed one of his most famous buildings, Fallingwater, which was built on top of a waterfall. Timecited   it after its completion as Wright’s “most beautiful job.”
① 대학 시절 수업료를 내기 위해 건축가와 함께 일을 했다.
② 학교를 중퇴하고 건축 회사에 일하러 갔다.
③ 도쿄에 지진을 견뎌낼 수 있는 호텔을 설계했다.
④ 대공황 때문에 글쓰기와 가르치는 일을 그만두었다.
⑤ 폭포 꼭대기에 지어진 건축물을 설계했다.
26. 
Vegetable Gardening Workshops에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 일요일에 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
② 토양을 좋게 만드는 법을 배운다.
③ 점심을 제공하지 않는다.
④ 지역 주민은 수강료가 절반이다.
⑤ 교육 장소에 직접 가서 등록해야 한다.

27. History Course: War and Memory에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 현장 학습을 포함한다.
② 7일 동안 진행된다.
③ 수업료 300달러 외에 교통비가 추가된다.
④ 신청 시 학년 제한이 있다.
⑤ 이메일로 신청서를 제출해야 한다.



영어 영역	5

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In early modern Europe, transport by water was usually much cheaper than transport by land. An Italian printer calculated in 1550 ① that to send a load of books from Rome to Lyons would cost 18 scudi by land compared with 4 by sea. Letters were normally carried overland, but a system of transporting letters and newspapers, as well as people, by canal boat ② developed in the Dutch Republic in the seventeenth century. The average speed of the boats was a little over four miles an hour, ③ slow compared to a rider on horseback. On the other hand, the service was regular, frequent and cheap, and allowed communication not only between Amsterdam and the smaller towns, but also between one small town and another, thus ④ equalizing accessibility to information. It was only in 1837, with the invention of the electric telegraph, that the traditional link between transport and the communication of messages ⑤ were broken.
* scudi: 이탈리아의 옛 은화 단위(scudo)의 복수형








29.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　You can use a third party to compliment a person you want to befriend and still get the “credit” for making the target of your compliment feel good about themselves and, by extension, feel good about you. When you (A) directly / indirectly compliment other people, particularly anybody who suspects you might want something from them, they tend to discount your efforts because they suspect you are intentionally trying to influence them through flattery. A third-party compliment
(B) eliminates / encourages this skepticism. To construct a third-party compliment you will need to find a mutual friend or acquaintance who knows both you and your person of interest. Further, you should be relatively certain that the third-party individual you choose will be likely to pass along your compliment to the person for whom it was intended. If this
(C) clarification / transmission of information is successful, the next time you meet your person of interest, he or she will see you from a positive perspective.

(A) (B)	(C)
① directly   …… eliminates  …… clarification
② directly …… encourages …… clarification
③ directly  …… eliminates  …… transmission
④  indirectly …… encourages …… transmission
⑤ indirectly …… eliminates …… clarification

30. 밑줄 친 him[he]이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　A mechanic had a shop student who was wanting to acquire the knowledge of what it truly meant to be a mechanic. Taking the student in, the mechanic showed ① him the ins and outs of being a mechanic in that shop. When he asked the student a question, he always congratulated ② him when the answer he provided was correct. Even when the answer was not, ③ he encouraged the student to think of the right answer. In the rare events when ④ he could not think of the right answer, the mechanic told him to go look in his book instead. The mechanic also said that the student had someone who believed in ⑤ him and his ability to become a mechanic.

[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. In psychology, a ‘model’ of something should never be taken as an exact copy of the thing being described, but rather as a representation of it. A map of the London Underground, for example, is a representation of the Underground layout that helps us appreciate how it works and where it goes. Of course direction, scale, etc. must be distorted somewhat to make it all fit neatly on the page. A model of memory is also a representation. Based on the evidence available, a model provides us with an analogy of how memory works. Describing memory in terms of ‘stores’ or ‘levels’ or ‘loops’ makes our understanding more concrete, and simply conveys to a reader a(n) 	of how a particular psychologist has attempted to understand and explain the available evidence. These models change as the available evidence changes, so should not be seen as permanent fixtures. [3점]
* analogy: 비유
① approximate idea	② factual experience
③ invariable principle	④ digital representation
⑤ undisputed interpretation

32. Whenever you feel yourself triggered by a passing thought, emotion, or sensation, you have a simple choice: toidentifyor getidentified. You can observe the thought and “identify” it. Or you can let yourself get caught up in the thought, in other words, “get identified” with it. Naming helps you identify so that you don’t get identified. As you observe your passing thoughts, emotions, and sensations, naming them ? Oh,thatis my old friend Fear; there goes the Inner Critic? neutralizes their effect on you and helps you to maintain your state of balance and  calm.  My  friend Donna even likes to give humorous names to her reactive emotions such as “Freddy Fear,” “Judge Judy,” and “Anger Annie.” (Humor, incidentally, can be a great ally in helping you regain perspective from the balcony.) As soon as you name the character in the play, you
 	. [3점]
① cheer on his or her performance
② adopt him or her as a role model
③ distance yourself from him or her
④ stop yourself from enjoying the play
⑤ become more emotionally expressive




6	영어 영역

3 . Here’s something I learned growing up in a military family and living overseas as a child. Being in environments where people did not look like me or even speak the same language as me forced me out of the comfort zone of obvious similarities. When you walk out of your house knowing that most of the people on your street speak a different language, you can either get hung up on that fact or you can open your eyes and begin to 	. Perhaps your nationality and language and culture and skin color are not the same, but your love of family and strawberries and holiday traditions are undeniably alike. It was a training ground for spotting commonalities. And there began my intrigue with cultures and language and people. Overfocusing on differences narrows your influence. But when you focus on commonalities, your influence grows.
① appreciate the significance of family
② shape the perceptions you have of yourself
③ go back to the comfort zone you belonged to
④ celebrate more traditional holidays than before
⑤ notice the larger human commonalities you share







34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　For almost every location in the world, there is an “optimal” temperature at which deaths are the lowest. On either side of this temperature ? both when it gets colder and warmer ? death rates increase.     (A)     , what the optimal temperature is is a different issue. If you live in Helsinki, your optimal temperature is about 59°F, whereas in Athens you do best at 75°F. The important point to notice is that the best temperature is typically very similar to the average summer temperature.   (B)   , the actual temperature will only  rarely go above the optimal temperature, but very often it will be below. In Helsinki, the optimal temperature is typically exceeded only 18 days per year, whereas it is below that temperature a full 312 days. Research shows that although 55 extra people die each year from it being too hot in Helsinki, some 1,655 people die from it being too cold.

(A) (B)
① However	…… Thus
② However	…… Otherwise
③ In addition	…… Instead
④ For instance …… Similarly
⑤ For instance …… That is

[35 ~ 36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35.


(A) The German word Gestalt means form, pattern, or whole. Gestalt psychologists studied thinking, learning, and perception in whole units, not by analyzing experiences into parts. Their slogan was, “The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.”
(B) Yet, we notice something interesting: The melody is still recognizable ― as long as the relationship between notes remains the same. Now, what would happen if you played the notes of “Happy Birthday” in the correct order, but at a rate of one per hour? What would we have? Nothing!
(C) The separate notes would no longer be a melody. Perceptually, the melody is somehow more than the individual notes that define it. It was observations like these that launched the Gestalt school of thought.
* tuba: 튜바(금관 악기의 일종)
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


36.


(A) During the winter in the northern hemisphere, water evaporates from the ocean and accumulates as ice and snow on the high mountains. This movement of water from the oceans to the mountaintops is similar to the skater’s extending her arms.
(B) In addition, there are also seasonal changes of a few milliseconds per year. In the winter the Earth slows down, and in the summer it speeds up. Think of the Earth as a spinning skater.
(C) So the Earth slows down in winter; by the summer the snow melts and runs back to the seas, and the Earth speeds up again. This effect is not compensated by the opposite effect in the southern hemisphere because most of the land mass is north of the equator. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7

[37 ~ 38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37.



　Almost all of science is fitting models to data. Scientists ? such as Galileo, Newton, and Mendel ? designed experiments, made observations, and collected data. ( ① ) They then tried to extract knowledge by devising theories, that is, building models to explain the data they observed. ( ② ) They then used these theories to make predictions and if they didn’t work, they collected more data and revised the theories. ( ③ ) This process of data collection and theory/model building continued until they got models that had enough explanation power. ( ④ ) Furthermore, the amount of data is huge and manual analysis is not possible. ( ⑤ ) There is thus a growing interest in computer programs that can analyze data and extract information automatically from them ? in other words, learn.









38.

39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　The growing seasons for tea in different geographic areas vary greatly. ① In a few locations with prime conditions, particularly at latitudes near the equator, tea can be harvested year-round. ② At higher elevations in areas farther from the equator, the productive season may be limited to only one or two flushes of new growth. ③ For example, Kenya, which lies on the equator, is one of the countries with the potential of year-round harvests, while farmers in areas of Shandong Province, the most northern tea farms in China, begin harvest in April and end in September. ④ China’s tea industry has great advantages on natural resources, geography, varieties of tea and technology. ⑤ Throughout the more than forty countries that grow tea commercially, there is a wide range in conditions that lead to the great variations of harvest times and in the flavors of the teas they produce.
* flush: (새잎이) 돋아남



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Cooperative tendencies cannot evolve (biologically) unless they present a competitive advantage on the cooperators. Imagine, for example, two groups of herders, one cooperative and one not. ( ① ) The cooperative herders limit the sizes of their individual herds, and thus preserve their commons, which allows them to maintain a sustainable food supply. ( ② ) The members of the uncooperative group follow the logic of self-interest, adding more and more animals to their respective herds. ( ③ ) Consequently, they use up their commons, leaving themselves with very little food. ( ④ ) They can wait for the uncooperative herders to starve, or, if they are more enterprising, they can wage an unequal war of the well fed against the hungry. ( ⑤ ) Once the cooperative group has taken over, they can raise even more animals, feed more children, and thus increase the proportion of cooperators in the next generation.
* common: 공유지




?



(A) (B)
① resist	…… consistent
② resist	…… unpredictable
③ notice	…… consistent
④ follow	…… unpredictable
⑤ follow	…… systematic




8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




(B) 



(C) 
(D) 









41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Do Humans Handle Information Overload?
② Increase Your Attention Span with Practice!
③ The More Information, The Better Results
④ Promising Future of the Information Society
⑤ Information Overload: An Obstacle to Remembering

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① criticize	② intervene	③ sympathize
④ generalize	⑤ disregard

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Jeremy was a humble man who cleaned the floors of the king and was always smiling and happy. The king complained to his advisor, “How come I’m the richest man in the kingdom, and I’m always unhappy, yet (a) he’s always beaming with happiness?” That night, the advisor visited a little hut where Jeremy lived happily with his family. He placed a bag with forty-nine gold coins in front of the poor man’s house and left.


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4 . 밑줄 친 (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 왕은 자신이 왕국에서 가장 큰 부자라고 말했다.
② 왕의 조언자가 Jeremy의 집 앞에 금화 주머니를 놓고 갔다.
③ Jeremy는 금화를 땅속에 숨기고 일을 하러 갔다.
④ Jeremy는 금화의 개수를 잘못 세었다.
⑤ Jeremy는 건강을 잃고 더 이상 일을 할 수 없었다.



2017학년도  대학수학능력시험  9월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good idea. Let’s do it this Friday.
② Sorry. I had to leave early yesterday.
③ No. The team meeting was canceled.
④ Thanks. We had a great time at the party.
⑤ Sure. We must hire him for our company.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Instead, you need to learn sign language.
② Actually, I didn’t read that news article.
③ Well, let’s plan a field trip with them.
④ Yeah, we had enough parking spaces.
⑤ Then, I’ll get him to sign your book.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 우체국 이전을 안내하려고
② 동호회 가입을 권유하려고
③ 여행 상품 정보를 제공하려고
④ 이사 업체 직원을 모집하려고
⑤ 동영상 제작 방법을 설명하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 대기 오염의 원인
② 기차 여행의 장점
③ 교통 체증의 심각성
④ 휴가 계획의 필요성
⑤ 안전 운전의 중요성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 초청 강사 － 행사 진행자
② 호텔 투숙객 － 호텔 직원
③ 보험 가입 고객 － 보험 설계사
④ 봉사 활동 희망자 － 도서관 직원
⑤ 도서 박람회 관람객 － 신문 기자



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장소 정하기	② 의자 나르기
③ 재료 구매하기	④ 메뉴 결정하기
⑤ 전단 복사하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 Ben Tyler 콘서트에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 부모님과 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 가족 파티를 준비해야 해서
③ 팀 프로젝트를 끝내야 해서
④ 수업을 들으러 가야 해서
⑤ 동생을 돌봐야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $54	② $63	③ $70
④ $81	⑤ $90


10. 대화를 듣고, Eugene Kim에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 출생지	② 수상작 제목	③ 집필한 책의 수
④ 집필 장소	⑤ 나이

11. Science Quiz Olympics에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 매년 열리는 행사이다.
② 9월 23일 금요일에 개최된다.
③ 모든 참가자는 티셔츠를 받는다.
④ 참가하려면 신청서를 작성해야 한다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 신청이 가능하다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 세발자전거를 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Kids’ Tricycles for Sale



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Of course, it is. It’ll be good for your future career.
② Certainly. You’re scheduled to meet my assistant.
③ I don’t think so. You can’t use the center for free.
④ No way. You don’t want to work with children.
⑤ Yes. It’s necessary to quit my part-time job.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Sorry. I don’t have the same interests as you.
② Thank you. It’ll help me make new friends.
③ Absolutely. I’ll give you some advice.
④ No thanks. I don’t like to play sports.
⑤ Well done. It was a wonderful game.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jenny가 Daniel에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Jenny:   	
① Why don’t you move to the dormitory?
② You’d better find a quiet place to study.
③ You should major in computer engineering.
④ How about taking a summer course together?
⑤ You need to follow the rules in the dormitory.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① benefits of cooking at home
② lives of great chefs in history
③ tips for cooking with leftover food
④ children’s snacks made from grains
⑤ food products invented accidentally

17. 언급된 음식이 아닌 것은?
① corn flakes	② potato chips	③ ice cream cones
④ onion rings	⑤ chocolate chip cookies

















① 야구와 관련된 새로운 사업을 제안하려고
② 야구 경기 관람권 구매 대행을 요청하려고
③ 아들 생일 파티를 위한 장소 예약을 취소하려고
④ 주말 가족 여행 일정 변경이 가능한지 문의하려고
⑤ 야구 경기 관람 여행에 아들의 추가 등록을 부탁하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘Amy’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Amy was in the classroom staring out of  the  window  beside her. She thought how her gloomy face in the window reflected her mistake. She tried not to think about her terrible performance in class. Watching Amy look so discouraged, Laurie, her best friend, decided she needed some cheering up. So Laurie crossed her eyes and made a stupid face. Amy tried not to look, but Laurie was making another funny face. This time she couldn’t help turning back to see what her friend was doing. It was her famous fish face: she was pushing her ears out, crossing her eyes, and opening her mouth wide. Amy laughed hard. She felt that she was lucky to have a friend that could always cheer her up when she was feeling down.
① relaxed	→ frustrated	② satisfied → ashamed
③ bored	→ exhausted	④ excited	→ frightened
⑤ depressed → comforted

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　My barely-five-year-old son couldn’t go to bed one night until he wrote “I love you Mom” on a piece of paper. Pajamas on, red crayon in hand, he was very determined. A few mixed-up letters, a couple of crumpled papers, and some help from Daddy later, he handed me his heart on the page. Then, finally, he relaxed enough to fall asleep. Sometimes, saying how you feel just isn’t enough. Spoken words are invisible and untouchable. Write it down, however, and you can see it, feel it, hold it, keep it forever. Although we may think it, we can’t really give someone our heart. But by writing, we can give someone our heart on a page. A love note is a piece of paper that is a little piece of your heart. Teach your child how to write love notes, and I promise you will have many, many happy returns.
* crumpled: 구겨진
① 자녀의 활동에 동참하여 유대감을 강화하라.
② 자녀가 글을 통해 마음을 표현하도록 가르치라.
③ 자녀가 부모의 사랑을 느낄 수 있도록 행동하라.
④ 자녀에게 대화를 통해 자연스럽게 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 자녀의 인지 능력 향상을 위해 글쓰기 교육을 하라.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One of the most demanding, and at the same time inspiring, aspects of translating for children is the potential for such creativity that arises from what Peter Hollindale has called the ‘childness’ of children’s texts: ‘the quality of being a child ― dynamic, imaginative, experimental, interactive and unstable’. The ‘unstable’ qualities of childhood that Hollindale cites require a writer or translator to have an understanding of the freshness of language to the child’s eye and ear, the child’s affective concerns and the linguistic and dramatic play of early childhood. Translating sound, for example, whether in the read-aloud qualities of books for the younger child, in animal noises, children’s poetry or in nonsense rhymes, demands imaginative solutions ― as indeed does working with visual material. Such multi-faceted creativity has, at times, placed children’s literature at the forefront of imaginative experimentation.
* multi-faceted: 다면의
① 아동문학 번역에서는 아동의 특성에 기반을 둔 창의성이 요구된다.
② 아동문학 속 다양한 의성어는 아동의 창의성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 아동문학 번역가는 아동의 태도를 긍정적으로 변화시키는 데 기여한다.
④ 아동문학가는 아동의 성장 과정을 구체적으로 표현할 수 있어야 한다.
⑤ 아동문학은 아동 언어 발달에 도움이 되는 다양한 요소들을 담고 있다.







22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　From an evolutionary perspective, fear has contributed to both fostering and limiting change, and to preserving the species. We are programmed to be afraid. It is a survival need, as is stability, which is another force of nature that can limit the capacity to change. Stable patterns are necessary lest we live in chaos; however, they make it difficult to abandon entrenched behaviors, even those that are no longer useful, constructive, or health creating. And fear can keep you from changing when you don’t want to risk a step into unknown territory; for example, some people choose not to leave an unfulfilling job or a failing relationship because they fear the unknown more than the known. On the other hand, fear can also motivate change in order to avoid something you’re afraid of, such as dying young ― as one of your parents might have.
* entrenched: 굳어버린
① fear’s negative roles in cases of chaos
② effective strategies for maintaining stability
③ fear and its dual functions in terms of change
④ the necessities of reducing a fear of the unknown
⑤ ways of confronting fear to overcome difficulties in life
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　A strategic vision has little value to the organization unless it’s effectively communicated down the line to lower-level managers and employees. It would be difficult for a vision statement to provide direction to decision makers and energize employees toward achieving long-term strategic intent unless they know of the vision and observe management’s commitment to that vision. Communicating the vision to organization members nearly always means putting “where we are going and why” in writing, distributing the statement organizationwide, and having executives personally explain the vision and its justification to as many people as possible. Ideally, executives should present their vision for the company in a manner that reaches out and grabs people’s attention. An engaging and convincing strategic vision has enormous motivational value ― for the same reason that a stone mason is inspired by building a great cathedral for the ages.
* stone mason: 석공	** cathedral: 대성당
① What Makes a Strategic Vision Successful?
② Why Is Creating a Vision Statement Difficult?
③ Building a Future: Innovative Leadership Training
④ Effective Decision-Making Processes in Organizations
⑤ Motivating Employees through Organizational Development

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?













　The above graph shows the percentage of Americans in different age groups who said it was “generally OK” to use a cellphone in different settings in 2014. ① In the setting of “On public transportation,” the younger groups are more accepting than the older ones regarding cellphone use. ② “When walking down the street” is the setting in which people aged 30-49 are more permissive towards cellphone use than the other age groups. ③ As for “At restaurants,” 50% of the 18-29 year olds answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones while 26% of those 65 and older say the same. ④ Only 4% of people in each of the two age groups, 30-49 and 50-64, agree that cellphone use is acceptable in the setting of “At movie theaters or other quiet places.” ⑤ In the same setting, less than 10% of people in each age group answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. !Kung San에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The !Kung San, also known as the Bushmen, live in the Kalahari Desert in southern Africa. The “!K” in the name “!Kung” is like the sound that occurs when a cork is pulled from a bottle. Traditionally, they lived by hunting and gathering, the way of life that was the universal mode of human existence until 10,000 years ago. The total population  of the !Kung San in 1986 was about 15,000, with most of   them living in nonhunting and gathering situations on cattleposts or farms. The !Kung San in the Dobe area of Botswana were divided into twenty five groups with a mean size of eighteen to twenty people. The !Kung San in that area had abundant food supply and a lot of leisure time. The main food crop was the wild mongongo nut, millions of which were harvested every year.
① 남부 아프리카 Kalahari  사막에 산다.
② 이름 속 “!K”는 병에서 코르크 마개를 뽑을 때 나는 소리와 유사하다.
③ 1986년에 전체 인구가 약 15,000명이었다.
④ Botswana의 Dobe 지역에서는 25개의 그룹으로 나뉘어 있었다.
⑤ Dobe  지역에서 식량은 부족했지만 여가 시간은 많았다.


26. 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Name Our Sports Center!
The grand opening of our brand-new sports center is on November 30th, but we still don’t
have a name! Please take this opportunity to be part of Watford Community history, and help us name it!
Entry Submission
?September 1st?30th on our website (www.watfordcc.org)
The three best entries will be selected by the Watford volunteer group and will be made available online for voting to decide the winner.
Vote
?October 15th?31st on our website
Winner Announcement
?November 3rd on our website
?Prize: a one-year sports center membership
We’re looking for the  most dynamic and  fun  names, so get your entries in now!
Watford Community Council


① 스포츠센터 개장일은 11월 30일이다.
② 응모작 제출은 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
③ 최상위 응모작 세 개가 온라인 투표 대상이 된다.
④ 투표는 두 달 동안 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
⑤ 우승 상품은 스포츠센터 1년 회원권이다.
27. 
Fashion Career Discovery Day에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


Fashion Career Discovery Day
Experience our Fashion Career Discovery Day and unlock pathways to a fulfilling career in fashion! Your day will include interviews with professional designers, as well as the opportunity to watch a fashion show.
Date: Saturday, November 5, 2016
Time: 10 a.m.?4 p.m.
Location: Pavilion Fashion Plaza
716 East Livera Street
Ticket Price: $20 per person (lunch and souvenir included)
A minimum of 15 participants is necessary for group bookings to receive a 10% discount.
Reservations are required and must be made on our website (www.pfp2016.org) by 6 p.m., Thursday, November 3, 2016.
Please email us at fashioncdd@pfp2016.org for further information.

① 전문 디자이너들과의 인터뷰는 포함되어 있지 않다.
② 11월 5일부터 이틀간 진행된다.
③ 티켓 가격에 점심과 기념품이 포함된다.
④ 10명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　Like life in traditional society, but unlike other team sports, baseball is not governed by the clock. A football game is comprised of exactly sixty minutes of play, a basketball game forty or forty-eight minutes, but baseball has no set length of time within which the game must be completed. The pace of the game is therefore leisurely and (A) unhurried / unhurriedly, like the world before the discipline of measured time, deadlines, schedules, and wages paid by the hour. Baseball belongs to the kind of world (B) which / in which people did not say, “I haven’t got all day.” Baseball games do have all day to be played. But that does not mean that they can go on forever. Baseball, like traditional life, proceeds according to the rhythm of nature, specifically the rotation of the Earth. During its first half century, games were not played at night, which meant that baseball games, like the traditional work day, (C) ending / ended when the sun set.
(A)	(B)	(C)
① unhurried	…… in which …… ended
② unhurried	…… which	…… ending
③ unhurriedly …… which	…… ended
④ unhurriedly …… which	…… ending
⑤ unhurriedly …… in which …… ended




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　You can’t have a democracy if you can’t talk with your neighbors about matters of mutual interest or concern. Thomas Jefferson, who had an enduring interest in democracy, came to a similar conclusion. He was prescient in understanding the dangers of (A) concentrated / limited power, whether in corporations or in political leaders or exclusionary political institutions. Direct involvement of citizens was what had made the American Revolution possible and given the new republic vitality and hope for the future. Without that involvement, the republic would die. Eventually, he saw a need for the nation to be (B) blended / subdivided into “wards” ― political units so small that everyone living there could participate directly in the political process. The representatives for each ward in the capital would have to be (C) resistant / responsive to citizens organized in this way. A vibrant democracy conducted locally would then provide the active basic unit for the democratic life of the republic. With that kind of involvement, the republic might survive and prosper.
* prescient: 선견지명이 있는	** vibrant: 활력이 넘치는
(A)	(B)	(C)
① concentrated …… blended …… resistant
② concentrated …… subdivided …… responsive
③ concentrated   …… subdivided   …… resistant
④ limited	…… subdivided   …… resistant
⑤ limited	…… blended …… responsive




30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Harumi Tanaka, from Osaka, Japan, had accepted an assignment in Boston. His task was to explore the possibility  of developing joint ventures with American firms. ① He had been invited by one company to spend a  month  there and had been assigned an office and a research assistant. Harumi agreed on a Monday to present a business plan the following Friday. On Tuesday, the computers in the company crashed, and the research assistant called in sick with a severe case of the flu. Still, Harumi pushed forward and presented  ② his plan on Friday. He began his presentation, “I’m sorry that
③ I am not well prepared. This meeting may not be a good  use of your time.” He then went into a clear, interesting presentation. After the meeting, one of the American executives said, “④ I don’t know why you had to apologize. Everyone knows about the computer crash and your assistant’s illness.” Harumi responded that he thought that the apology would be    a good introduction to ⑤ his presentation.

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. A sleeping mother has the ability to identify the particular cry of her own baby. This is one of the bonding factors that  has been forgotten because of the way in which we live today. Typically, there is now only one newborn baby in any family house or apartment, so there is no way to test this ability. In   an ancient tribe, however, living in small huts in a tiny village
settlement, a mother would have been able to hear any of the babies crying in the night. If she woke up every time one of them screamed for food, she might get no sleep at all. During the course of evolution she became programmed to  awake only at the sound of her own particular baby. This   	                   is still there to this day, even though it is seldom used. [3점]
① affection	② creativity	③ sociability
④ intolerance	⑤ sensitivity


















32. When people try to control situations that are essentially uncontrollable, they are inclined to experience high levels of stress. Thus, suggesting that they need to take active control is bad advice in those situations. What they need to do is to accept that some things are beyond their control. Similarly, teaching
people to accept a situation that could readily be changed could be bad advice; sometimes the only way to get what you want is to take active control. Research has shown that when people who feel helpless fail to take control, they experience negative emotional states such as anxiety and depression. Like stress, these negative emotions can damage the immune response. We can see from this that health is not linearly related to control. For optimum health, people should be encouraged to take control to a point 	. [3점]
① but to yield to the situations within their control
② but to disregard immune response when stressed
③ but to recognize when further control is impossible
④ and to fight against uncontrollable situations persistently
⑤ and to try harder to conquer uncontrollable stressful situations




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. A good deal of the information stored in working memory is encoded in an auditory form, especially when the information is language based. For example, in an early study by Conrad, adults were shown six-letter sequences, with letters being presented visually, one at a time, at intervals of three-fourths of a second. As soon as the last letter of a sequence had been presented, participants in the study wrote down all six of the letters they had seen, guessing at any letters they couldn’t easily recall. When people recalled letters incorrectly, the letters they said they had seen were more likely to resemble the actual stimuli in terms of 		. For example, the letter F was “remembered” as the auditorially
similar letter S 131 times but as the visually similar letter P only 14 times. Similarly, the letter V was remembered as B 56 times but as X only 5 times. [3점]
① how the letters were visually represented
② how the letters sounded than how they looked
③ how the length of the letter sequence was recognized
④ how the letters were ordered than how they were pronounced
⑤ how often the letters appeared than how long they were shown






34. Even if it is correct to say that we express and represent   our thoughts in language, it may be a big mistake to suppose that there are structural similarities between what is doing the representing and what is represented. Robert Stalnaker, in his book Inquiry, suggests an analogy with the representation of numbers: The number 9 can be represented as ‘12?3’ but it does not follow that 12, 3, or subtraction are constituents of  the number 9. We could compare a thought and its verbal expression with toothpaste and its ‘expression’ from a tube. That the result of expressing toothpaste is a long,  thin,  cylinder does not entail that toothpaste itself is long, thin, or cylindrical. Similarly, a thought might get expressed out loud in a statement with a particular linguistic structure. It does not follow that 	. Suppose, for example, that I look at a fruit bowl, and think
that there is an apple and an orange in that bowl. The objects  in front of my eyes include some pieces of fruit and a bowl,  but no object corresponding to the word ‘and’ exists either in the world or in my visual image. [3점]
* subtraction: 빼기	** entail: 의미(함의)하다
① the thought itself has such a structure
② linguistic analysis of a thought is unlikely
③ the language in mind lacks a logical structure
④ a thought and its verbal expression are distinct
⑤ the sentence structurally differs from the thought
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　The pull effect of a destination can be positively influenced by the introduction and reinforcement of pro-tourism policies that make a destination more accessible. ① Governments, for example, can and often do employ awareness campaigns among the resident population to promote a welcoming attitude towards visitors, in order to foster a positive market image.
② However, because such campaigns depend on widespread social engineering, and because their effects can be counteracted by random acts of violence, positive outcomes cannot be guaranteed. ③ Most governments in developing countries encourage international tourism because tourists  from wealthy countries usually spend more. ④ Furthermore,  it is the behaviour of some tourists, and the structure and development of tourism itself, that often generate negative attitudes within the host community. ⑤ This implies that major structural changes to tourism itself, rather than awareness campaigns, may be required to foster a welcoming attitude.







[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) This is very important for understanding why people will often return to explore things that they explored before or do things they have done before. In our daily lives, for example, we might decide to listen to a piece of music that we have listened to many times.
(B) By returning to that music with a new or fresh perspective, perhaps as a result of listening to other music, we find something new and interesting. One reason that people can play a card game such as bridge over and over is that no matter how many times you have played the game, it will be different in some way.
(C) They suggested that curiosity is stimulated by novelty and argued that novelty is in the eye of the  beholder.  We could have seen something many times before, but as the result of having new skills or competence, we discover new or different aspects of that object.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) Some of them may have traveled by small boat along the coast, but many walked. Twenty thousand years ago, at the height of the last glacial period, sea level was so low that dry land joined what are now separate continents.
(B) But the rewards were great when one was brought down.  A single mammoth could feed, clothe, and supply a band for a long time. The hunters had followed the mammoths and other large animals eastward from Asia across what is now the Bering Sea.
(C) Slowly, imperceptibly, and probably unconsciously, hunters had moved across the land bridge and become the first immigrants to the new land. Without the ice age, North America might have remained unpopulated for thousands of years more.
* slay: 죽이다
① (A) ? (C) ? (B)	② (B) ? (A) ? (C)
③ (B) ? (C) ? (A)	④ (C) ? (A) ? (B)
⑤ (C) ? (B) ? (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.

Even so, research confirms the finding that nonverbal cues are more credible than verbal cues, especially when verbal and nonverbal cues conflict.

　Researchers have reported various nonverbal features of sarcasm. ( ① ) Most disagree as to  whether nonverbal cues  are essential to the perception of sarcasm or the emotion that prompts it. ( ② ) Also, nonverbal cues are  better indicators of speaker intent. ( ③ ) As the nature of sarcasm implies a contradiction between intent and message, nonverbal  cues  may “leak” and reveal the speaker’s true mood as they do in deception. ( ④ ) Ostensibly, sarcasm is the opposite of deception in that a sarcastic speaker typically intends the receiver to recognize the sarcastic intent; whereas, in deception the speaker typically intends that the receiver not recognize   the deceptive intent. ( ⑤ ) Thus, when communicators are attempting to determine if a speaker is sarcastic, they compare the verbal and nonverbal message and if the two are in opposition, communicators may conclude that the speaker is being sarcastic.
* sarcasm: 비꼼	** ostensibly: 표면상
　
Our total set of values and their relative importance to us constitute our value system. ( ① ) The way that we behave in  a given situation is often influenced by how important one value is to us relative to others. ( ② ) For instance, deciding whether to spend Saturday afternoon relaxing with your family or exercising will be determined by the relative importance  that you place on family versus health. ( ③ ) You feel value conflict when you do something that is consistent with one value but inconsistent with another equally important value.     ( ④ ) They may experience value conflict if they buy disposable diapers for their babies. ( ⑤ ) Consumers facing such decisions consider not only the product’s immediate consumption outcomes but also the product’s general effect   on society, including how the manufacturer behaves (e.g., toward the environment).
* diaper: 기저귀

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]




(A) (B)
① successive	…… unique
② successive	…… valuable
③ controlled	…… valuable
④ incidental	…… influential
⑤ incidental	…… unique



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.


41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the cultural significance of musical performance
② strategies for creating public interest through music
③ the rise of performing rights in music and its effects
④ performing arts for the public and their artistic value
⑤ the influence of the new society on increasing licence fees


42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Accordingly	② Nevertheless	③ Otherwise
④ Conversely	⑤ Similarly




[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

　What interested me the most about the new house was the stable in the backyard, in which my father let me make a small space for a pony. I believed that it meant that I would get a pony for Christmas. (a) He also said, “Lennie, someday you’ll have a pony of your own.” However, “some day” is a pain to a boy who lives in and knows only “now.”
　
Meanwhile my father took me to a pony fair and let me try some ponies, but (b) he always found some fault with them, leaving me in despair. When Christmas was at hand, I had abandoned all hope of getting one. Instead, I hung up the biggest stocking I had. Waking up at 7 a.m., my little sisters and I raced for the fireplace downstairs. While my sisters were delighted to find their stockings filled with presents, mine was empty. I went out into the yard and wept all by myself.
　After an hour, my frustration reached its climax, when I saw a man riding a pony with a brand-new saddle. When he looked at our door, he just passed by, which caused me to break into a flood of tears. Then, he said, “Kid, do you know a boy named Lennie Steffens?” “That’s me,” I replied in tears. He said, “I’ve been looking all over for your house. Why don’t you put your house number where it can be seen?” He went on saying, “I should have been here at 7. Your father told me to bring the pony here and leave (c) him for you.”
　I’d never seen anything so beautiful as my pony. And finally, I rode off into the fields. Thrilled by riding, I began to feast my eyes on the world around me. The trees seemed to be taking on smiling faces and the birds seemed to be singing to congratulate me on getting my new friend. When I returned home, my father asked, “Why did you come back so soon?” With a smile on my face, I answered (d) him, “I didn’t want to make him feel tired. It’s his first day with me.” (e) He laughed and wiped away the tear stains from my face ― his heartfelt gesture of apology for such a long-delayed present. Bursting with happiness, I spent the rest of the day brushing my pony in the stable.
* stable: 마구간
43. 윗글의 마지막 단락에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
① witty and humorous	② joyful and heartwarming
③ gloomy and hopeless	④ mysterious and adventurous
⑤ desperate and discouraging

44. 밑줄 친 (a) ～ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지는 Lennie에게 조랑말을 위한 공간을 마련하도록 하였다.
② 아버지는 Lennie를 조랑말 시장에 데리고 갔다.
③ Lennie의 여동생들은 크리스마스 선물을 받지 못했다.
④ Lennie는 조랑말을 예정보다 늦게 받았다.
⑤ Lennie는 마구간에서 조랑말을 솔질해 주었다.






이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2016학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think you can use the court anytime.
② I guess it’ll be at least a week from now.
③ I don’t know what time the game will start.
④ I really expect to win the game this time.
⑤ I’m not sure why the game was canceled.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m glad you had fun at the cheese farm.
② Oh, it’s great that they’ll offer free lunch.
③ Okay, I’ll go pick you up at school at noon.
④ Then I’ll go grocery shopping for your lunch.
⑤ Let’s take a half day trip to the cheese farm then.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 통학버스 운행 시간 변경을 알리려고
② 통학버스 이용 신청 방법을 안내하려고
③ 등교 시간 준수의 중요성을 강조하려고
④ 등하교 시 대중교통 이용을 권장하려고
⑤ 통학버스 이용 시 안전 수칙을 설명하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이들에게 적합한 시를 고르는 기준
② 자녀에게 시를 읽어 주는 것의 장점
③ 일상에서 시의 소재를 찾는 요령
④ 자녀의 독립심을 키우는 방법
⑤ 아동 문학을 발전시킬 필요성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사진 작가 - 모델
② 건축 설계사 - 의뢰인
③ 부동산 중개인 - 집주인
④ 이삿짐센터 직원 - 고객
⑤ 홈페이지 관리 담당자 - 사장



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 축구장으로 Andy 찾아가기
② 세탁소에 축구화 맡기기
③ Andy와 함께 축구하기
④ 축구장 사용 신청하기
⑤ Andy에게 전화하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 과학 박람회에 가는 이유를 고르시오.
① 사진을 다시 찍어야 해서
② 메모리 카드를 찾아야 해서
③ 학교 신문을 가져가야 해서
④ 부스를 대신 운영하게 되어서
⑤ 부스 운영자와 인터뷰를 해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $90	② $100	③ $110	④ $120	⑤ $130

10.대화를  듣고,  특별  강연회에  관해  두  사람이  언급하지  않은 것을 고르시오.
① 강연자	② 강연 주제	③ 강연 일시
④ 수용 인원	⑤ 참가 신청 장소

1.Sunset Bay Wild Dolphin Cruise에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 90분 동안 진행된다.
② 때때로 바다거북을 볼 수도 있다.
③ 망원경을 유료로 대여해 준다.
④ 매일 오전에 1회, 오후에 1회 출발한다.
⑤ 출발 시간 최소 30분 전에 탑승권을 구매해야 한다.




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

12.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  구입할  그릇  세트
를 고르시오.

18.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Sweet Home Dinnerware Sets

①
②
③
④
⑤

13.대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① I see. I won’t be late for the exam again.
② Okay. I’ll finish reviewing as quickly as possible.
③ Don’t worry. I’m all done, so I can go to bed now.
④ You’re right. The history exam is still a week away.
⑤ But I really need more time to complete the history project.


14.대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① No. I never thought that I was good at acting.
② Yeah, I feel sorry that you didn’t recognize me.
③ Sometimes, but family means a lot more to me.
④ Of course. I regret I didn’t act in Hamlet at that time.
⑤ Not in the least. I love my job as a professional actor.

15.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Baker가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Ms. Baker:  	
① Dreams can always change at your age.
② Never rely on your talent without effort.
③ You should not be afraid of failing to get a new job.
④ The contest is an opportunity to show your potential.
⑤ Don’t give up your dream just because of this one failure.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the danger of camping alone
② tips for purchasing camping gears
③ pros and cons of camping in the wild
④ what to consider in choosing a campsite
⑤ how to deal with an emergency while camping

17.언급된 내용이 아닌 것은?
① 물	② 소음	③ 바람	④ 햇빛	⑤ 식물









① 부상을 당하게 된 경위를 설명하려고
② 의사 소견서를 직장으로 보내줄 것을 요청하려고
③ 보험사 제출용 진료 확인 서류 발급을 의뢰하려고
④ 이미 치료받은 질병의 재발에 대해 문의하려고
⑤ 병원에서의 업무 변경을 부탁하려고




19.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Pests are a concern for collection preservation and a health risk, and both issues must be addressed by a facilities management plan. Pest management starts with good housekeeping, so the museum’s overall custodial staff must be considered part of the pest management team. A program should be established that looks for likely invasion routes of pests into a museum facility and takes steps to prevent use of these routes. Efforts should be made to prevent pests from entering the museum building at points such as visitor entrances, service entrances, air intake points, food facilities, windows, and cracks and breaks in the building. Housekeeping should be concentrated at these points of entry.
* custodial staff: 관리 직원
① 박물관의 구조는 해충의 침입에 대비하여 설계해야 한다.
② 박물관은 해충의 침입 경로 차단을 위한 노력을 해야 한다.
③ 박물관은 방문객들에게 바람직한 관람 태도를 홍보해야 한다.
④ 소장품 보존과 관련된 박물관 직원들의 전문성을 높여야 한다.
⑤ 보건 위생을 위해 박물관은 소독을 정기적으로 실시해야 한다.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20.다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　It was a long day, which included picking up my teenager. On our way home, we stopped at the local grocery store to get some fruits and vegetables. After unloading our cart at the checkout I realized that my wallet was not in my purse. I didn’t know what to do. Without any hesitation, the lady in front of me said, “Put it through, I’ll take care of it.” I hesitated and hesitated, but she insisted. I asked about how to pay her back and she said I could leave it with the staff in an envelope for “Ann from The Crimson Company.” She didn’t ask for my name or phone number ? not a thing. For my son and me, it was a lovely gift to start off the new year. She reminded me that life is too short to not lend a helping hand when the opportunity arises.
① satisfied → regretful ② delighted → angry
③ indifferent → worried ④ embarrassed → touched
⑤ anticipating → envious

21.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　J. K. Rowling, the  author  of  the  famous  Harry  Potter  series, has personally corresponded with several dying children who were fans of ① her books and with the parents of children who have died. For example, in January 2000, she sent an e­mail to Catie Hoch, an eight­year­old girl suffering from cancer, who ② she had heard about. Catie loved Harry Potter, and Rowling began a correspondence with her, telling her secrets about the fourth book that ③ she was writing. When Rowling heard that cancer had spread to Catie’s brain, one month after her ninth birthday, and that she only had a few weeks left to live, Rowling began calling Catie, and reading ④ her the yet unpublished Book 4 over the phone. Three days after Catie died, Rowling wrote to tell Catie’s parents that ⑤ she felt privileged to have had contact with Catie. When Catie’s parents established the Catie Hoch Foundation to help young cancer patients, Rowling contributed to it.

2.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Certain personality characteristics make some people more resistant to distress. ① Individuals who believe they control their own destinies and generally expect the best from life are, in fact, more likely to gain control of their stressors and experience positive stress rather than distress, according to research. ② It is important to realize that these person factors ? self­mastery and optimism ? are not permanent inborn traits of people. ③ Genetic factors in personality development are undeniable and cannot be influenced by the environment. ④ They are states of mind or expectations derived from personal experience, and they can be nurtured.
⑤ It is possible to give people experiences that increase feelings of being “in control” ? experiences that lead people to believe something good will come from their attempts to turn stress into constructive action.

23.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In England, Dr. Peter Messent followed people on their walks through city parks and found that people with dogs were much more likely to be engaged in conversation than people who were walking alone. People with pets were even more approachable than mothers with small infants. The same kind of results were observed in another study, by Randall Lockwood. He showed subjects a series of relatively ambiguous pictures of people in a variety of common social settings. There were two similar sets of pictures: in one there were only people, and in the other there was a pet with one of the people in each scene. The subjects were asked to rate each of the people in the pictures according to several scales. The results were predictable. People with pets were perceived as being more socially attractive and as having more desirable personal characteristics. Pets changed the people’s social identity for the better.
① 애완동물은 동반하는 사람에 대한 호감도와 친근감을 높인다.
② 애완동물과 규칙적으로 산책하는 것은 건강에 좋다.
③ 애완동물에게도 다양한 정서적 욕구가 존재한다.
④ 애완동물은 아이들의 인성 발달에 도움을 준다.
⑤ 애완동물이 가족의 구성원으로 부각되고 있다.









24.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Not just information but also people may move between societies, taking their knowledge and cultural practices with them. Like war, migration is an ancient phenomenon and very common throughout history. Although it is often regarded with suspicion, immigration tends to confer benefits on the host group. In recent history, countries with the highest net inward migration have also had the highest growth rates, the two factors clearly being linked in harmony. The complaint that immigrants take people’s jobs is, like similar complaints about technology, based on an erroneously static view of the world. In fact, immigrants increase the size of the market and thus create jobs. Furthermore, they arrive as already productive adults having never been dependent on the host country. They also tend to be motivated and intelligent individuals with a talent for the creation of economic organization.
* net inward migration: 순 유입(純 流入)
① necessity of consistently educating immigrants
② endless controversy over worldwide immigration
③ difficulties in creating a new economic organization
④ positive effects of immigration on the host country
⑤ efficient ways to activate movement between societies



4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

25.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　If you ever tried to cut wood with a blunt, dull axe, you know how much effort it takes to succeed. But as soon as the blade is filed sharp, the work can proceed with much less exertion. The secret lies in knowing when to stop and sharpen the blade. The same principles hold true for work. If you are stuck in a pattern of doing the same things every day and you feel as though you are becoming dull, perhaps it is time to stop and sharpen your axe. Sign up for a business seminar, read business books or magazines or attend a trade show. Take decisive action to restore a sharp edge to your productivity. This is the very reason professionals such as accountants, lawyers and nurses are required to continuously learn what’s new in the profession in order to remain up­to­date and useful in their professions. Stay motivated and accept no excuses for not increasing your efficiency and effectiveness.
* file: (날을) 갈다
① Keep on Learning to Stay Productive
② Repeat the Same Things for Mastery
③ Different Jobs Require Different Skills
④ Competition Does Not Ensure Productivity
⑤ Knowledge Is One Thing, Practice Another




26.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
27. 
barn owl에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The barn owl is a medium­sized owl with a heart­shaped face. The females are sometimes 30-55 grams heavier than the males and usually darker and more heavily spotted. Notable is the near absence of obvious dark markings on the underside of the flight and tail feathers. The white legs of barn owls are feathered nearly to the base of their gray­brown toes; their long needle­sharp claws are dark gray. The barn owl gives a loud screeching sound, sometimes with a tremulous effect, often described as  shrrreeee. In Britain, the owl’s cry gave this owl the name ‘Screech Owl’ in 1666, but as early as 1678 it was changed to ‘Barn Owl.’ This owl is rather common and widely distributed from Central Europe to Africa and Southeast Asia. In England and Wales the population was approximately 12,000 pairs in 1932, but numbers there have decreased in the last fifty years by almost 70 percent.
* screech: 날카로운 소리를 내다
** tremulous: 떨리는
① 얼굴이 하트 모양인 중간 크기의 올빼미이다.
② 길고 매우 날카로운 발톱은 짙은 회색이다.
③ 울음소리 때문에 붙여진 이름이 있었다.
④ 중부 유럽에서 아프리카와 동남아시아까지 널리 분포한다.
⑤ 지난 50년간 잉글랜드와 웨일스에서 개체 수가 증가했다.






28.(A),  (B),  (C)의 각  네모 안에서  어법에 맞는 표현으로  가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Sometimes perfectionists find that they are troubled because

(A) they do it never seems good enough. If
I ask, “For whom is it not good enough?” they do not always know the answer. After giving it some thought they usually conclude that it is not good enough for them and not good enough for other important people in their lives. This is a key point, because it suggests that the standard you may be
struggling to (B)	may not actually be  your

　The graph above shows the most commonly consumed fresh fruits among U.S. consumers in 1970 and in 2010. ① In 1970,

own. Instead, the standard you have set for yourself may be the standard of some important person in your life, such as a

apples were America’s number one consumed fruit, followed

parent or a boss or a spouse. (C)

your life in

by bananas, while their ranks were reversed in 2010. ② In 1970, oranges ranked third among the most commonly consumed fresh fruits, but in 2010 went down to sixth place.
③ In the case  of  watermelon,  the amount  consumed per

pursuit of someone else’s expectations is a difficult way to
live. If the standards you set were not yours, it may be time to define your personal expectations for yourself and make self­fulfillment your goal.

person in 1970 was below four pounds, but it exceeded four

(A)

(B)

(C)
pounds	in	2010.	④ Unlike	in	1970,	when	pears	ranked
①
what
······
meet
······
Live
seventh, in 2010 pears were not within the top seven and
②
what
······
be met
······
Living
strawberries appeared on the graph taking fifth place. ⑤ Both
③
whatever
······
meet
······
Live
in 1970 and in 2010, the per person consumption of peaches
④
whatever
······
meet
······
Living
was larger than that of grapes.
⑤
whatever
······
be met
······
Live



영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29.다음  글의  밑줄  친  부분  중,  문맥상  낱말의  쓰임이  적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
　One reason conversational life can lack depth and excitement is that we easily fall into using ① formulaic questions to open a dialogue ― How are you? What was the weather like? What do you do? How was your weekend? Although such questions can be important social lubricants, in themselves they generally fail to ② spark an engaging and enriching empathic exchange. We answer “Fine” or “OK,” then move on down the corridor. The way a conversation ③ begins can be a major determinant of where it goes. So it is worth experimenting with adventurous openings. Instead of greeting a workmate with “How are things?” try taking your conversation in a different direction with something mildly ④ unusual like, “What have you been thinking about this morning?” or “What was the most surprising thing that happened to you over the weekend?” You need to come up with the kinds of questions that suit your own personality. The point is to ⑤ follow conventions so your conversations become energizing, memorable, and vehicles for empathic discovery.

31.Arch Creek Winter Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치
하는 것은?

* lubricant: 윤활유

30.An Afternoon with the Author에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



① 크리스마스 전날과 새해 전날에도 운영된다.
② 하루에 8시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 참가자의 연령에는 제한이 없다.
④ 현장 학습 비용이 추가로 청구될 수 있다.
⑤ 등록은 11월 26일에 마감된다.






















① 일요일 오후에 두 시간 동안 진행된다.
② 작가의 최신작 출간을 축하하는 행사이다.
③ 작가의 강연 후에 질의응답 시간이 있다.
④ 30분간의 책 사인회가 있다.
⑤ 서점이 주관하는 무료 행사이다.

[32 ~ 35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 32. 	is	one	of	the	keys	to	leadership effectiveness. We want realness in the executive suite, in
the superintendent’s office, and in our religious leaders. We yearn for leaders who are themselves rather than a copy of someone else. We want leaders who will be fully human with us, men and women who are vulnerable enough to acknowledge their strengths and weaknesses, their gifts and limits, and who are appropriately transparent about their hopes and fears, their motivations and their agendas. We trust leaders who are real, who walk their talk, who act on their core values, and who tell us the truth. We authorize others to lead who author their own life. Those we deem not trustworthy we don’t authorize to lead. [3점]
① Authenticity	② Tolerance
③ Dedication	④ Compassion
⑤ Responsibility




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3.Life is rhythmic, cyclical, and always evolving. It’s difficult
not to notice repetition and renewal going on all around you. Just as darkness comes at the end of each day, so also comes the dawn to spread light across the land. Just as plants must die at the end of their life cycle, the seeds they have produced will emerge as new plants in the spring. Understanding the cyclical nature of life will reassure you that difficult times won’t last forever, and you will feel joy and happiness again. The rough times must be endured and taken as they come, but they are not constant, nor do they last forever. There will always be good times and bad, feasts and famines, hot summers and cold winters. Whenever you feel stuck, spiritually dry, or just plain gloomy, take time to remind yourself that 	.
[3점]
① every person counts
② change is on its way
③ memories live forever
④ it never rains but it pours
⑤ the past never comes back













34. Technology is the basis of many of our metaphors and is important in terms of how we think and how our ideas
progress. The use of metaphor and the process of design and the evolution of science and technology are cyclic in the sense that metaphors help to shape technology, and new technology leads to new metaphors. Major changes arise periodically, such as moving from horse­drawn carriages to motor­driven vehicles. The initial description of the latter is naturally metaphorical, as in the term “horseless carriage.” The association with the previous technology is both verbal and visual. The early designs of such vehicles show visual evidence of the metaphor, as they retained much of the appearance	of	horse­drawn	carriages.	The	horse­drawn carriage was itself a technological innovation, as were the horseless carriage and later automobiles. We tend to not only base new inventions on old, but also explain and try to understand new inventions in terms of			. [3점]
① where they are used
② what we already know
③ what we want to forget
④ how much we can earn
⑤ how inventors explore
35. 
As the new century begins, the competition between cars
and crops for cropland is intensifying. Until now, the paving over of cropland has occurred largely in industrial countries, home to four fifths of the world’s 520 million automobiles. But now, more and more farmland is being sacrificed in developing countries with hungry populations, calling into question the future role of the car. Millions of hectares of cropland in the industrial world have been paved over for roads and parking lots. Each U.S. car, for example, requires on average 0.07 hectares of paved land for roads and parking space. For every five cars added to the total number of cars in the U.S., an area the size of a football field is covered with asphalt. More often than not, cropland is paved simply because the flat, well­drained soils that are well suited for farming are also ideal for building roads. Once paved, land is not easily reclaimed. As environmentalist Rupert Cutler once noted, “ 	.” [3점]
* reclaim: 복원하다
① Asphalt is the land’s last crop
② Wasteland is a treasure of biodiversity
③ The end of the road leads to another road
④ What comes from soil returns to soil
⑤ The eco­friendly car is our future




[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) At other times, a reverse procedure would be followed. Music would be written after a sequence had been shot and edited, to conform to a rough of the final picture “cut.” The aim was to relate music and picture through an identical fluidity of aural and visual structure.
(B) Following these talks, the composer would sometimes rough out and record musical passages for a scene or sequence. The director would then film these sections and try editing them in accordance with the musical construction.
(C) In the  book  Film Sense,  Eisenstein  describes  how closely composer and director worked to achieve a structural harmony between picture and sound. First there were lengthy discussions about the intention and construction of each film section.
* rough: 초안, 개략
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(A) Of course the mirror was not magic. The king’s weight loss was directly attributable to two months of early morning jogging. Would the king have taken the advice if he had been told to do that?
(B) The wise man told him that there was a magic mirror in the king’s woods and, if one looked into it, one would become as thin as one wanted. The only problem was that this mirror could only be found in the woods early in the morning at sunrise and then only for a few minutes did its magic work.
(C) The king then proceeded to get up just before dawn every morning and run around the woods searching for this mirror. After a couple of months the wise man placed a mirror in the woods for the king to find one morning and miraculously he had lost all the weight he had wanted.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)







[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가 장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　Rights, and in particular human rights, can be divided into two broad categories: negative rights and positive rights. Negative rights reflect the vital interests that human beings have in being free from outside interference. ( ① ) The rights guaranteed in the Bill of Rights ― freedom of speech, assembly, religion, and so on ― fall within this category, as do the rights to freedom from injury and to privacy. ( ② ) Correlating with these are duties that we all have not to interfere with others’ pursuit of these interests and activities. ( ③ ) They are rights to have others provide us with certain goods, services, or opportunities. ( ④ ) Today, positive rights often are taken to include the rights to education, medical care, equal job opportunity, comparable pay, and so on. ( ⑤ ) Correlating with these are positive duties for appropriate parties to assist individuals in their pursuit of these interests.
* Bill of Rights: 권리 장전

40.다음  글을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와  (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　Since its debut in 2000, an American drama centered around crime scene investigation has become very popular. ( ① ) In 2002, it was the most watched show on American television, and by 2009 the worldwide audience was estimated to be more than 73 million. ( ② ) Their fears have been echoed by Monica Robbers, a criminologist, who found evidence that jurors have increasingly unrealistic expectations of forensic evidence. ( ③ ) Bernard Knight, formerly one of Britain’s chief pathologists, agrees. ( ④ ) Jurors today, he observes, expect clearer proof than forensic science is capable of delivering. ( ⑤ ) And he attributes this trend directly to the influence of television crime dramas.
* forensic: 과학 수사의
** pathologist: 병리학자




?


(A) (B)
① hinder	······	infections
② hinder	······	prejudice
③ maintain	······	prejudice
④ promote	······	infections
⑤ promote	······	poverty




8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
 After a brief discussion, Jessica decided to switch to the saxophone even though her mom was concerned that it might be too heavy. She wanted Jessica to see how it felt before they made the final decision. Jessica’s mom said (c) she would come along when it was time for Jessica to tell the band teacher her decision. When they finally met with the band teacher, he said, “Why not play the clarinet? It’s much more feminine.” Jessica was annoyed and insulted.

(D)










41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Musicians: The Magicians in Our Lives
② Classical Music: A Source of Inspiration
③ What Does an Audience Mean to Performers?
④ How Recording Changed the Way We Enjoy Music
⑤ Should Classical Music Audiences Always Be Serious?
42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① presence	② dream
③ proposal	④ trust
⑤ applause

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)


43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 Jessica에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 몇 달 동안 트롬본 수업을 즐겁게 받았다.
② 배우는 악기를 색소폰으로 바꾸기로 하였다.
③ 엄마와 함께 밴드 선생님을 만나러 갔다.
④ 밴드 선생님으로부터 악기를 바꾸라는 권유를 받았다.
⑤ 부는 힘이 약하여 트롬본의 몇 개의 음을 낼 수 없었다.





2016학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m not sure she can visit me this time.
② Definitely. She’s excited to move there soon.
③ That’s right. She’s already made plans for me.
④ I don’t think I’m the right person to guide you.
⑤ Unfortunately, she can’t go to Thailand with me.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Well, I’ll just take the soup to the study for him.
② Sure, I can go with him to buy some pumpkins.
③ Okay, I’ll ask him to make some pumpkin soup.
④ I’m sorry, but I’m too busy to clean the study.
⑤ Hmm, I don’t think he likes pumpkin soup.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 학교 입학 절차에  대해 설명하려고
② 개교 기념 행사 참여를  권유하려고
③ 등산 시 안전사고  주의를 당부하려고
④ 학교 주변 등산로  이용을 안내하려고
⑤ 개교 기념 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공공 미술의 지나친 상업화를 막아야 한다.
② 공공 미술 작품 관리에  더 신경 써야  한다.
③ 공공 미술 설치를 위한 예산을 늘려야 한다.
④ 공공 미술은 지역 경제 발전에 기여해야 한다.
⑤ 공공 미술 작품은 지역의 특성을 반영해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 제빵사 - 고객
② 기자 - 사진작가
③ 요리 강사 - 수강생
④ 숲 해설사 - 탐방객
⑤ 식료품점 주인 - 요리사
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy books for the lesson
② to sign up for a violin lesson
③ to take her son to the teacher
④ to ask her son to call the teacher
⑤ to look for her son in the bookstore

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 마라톤 대회에 참가하지 않는 이유를 고 르시오.
① 참가 신청 시기를  놓쳐서
② 무릎 수술을 받아야  해서
③ 마라톤 코스가 변경되어서
④ 같이 참가할 사람이  없어서
⑤ 훈련을 충분히 하지  못해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $80	② $85	③ $95	④ $100	⑤ $105

10. 대화를 듣고, MC Tower에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것 을 고르시오.
① 개장 연도	② 즐길 거리
③ 교통편	④ 폐장 시간
⑤ 입장료

11. Spring Swimming Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하 지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 3월 27일에 Paradise Beach에서 열린다.
② 연날리기 프로그램이 있다.
③ 수영 대회 참가 신청은 당일 오후 3시까지이다.
④ 수영 대회는 무료로 참가한다.
⑤ 보험은 웹사이트에서 신청해야 한다.



2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 장난감 블록
세트를 고르시오.
Fun & Joy Toy Blocks


①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① They’ll understand safety is the top priority.
② Well, it’ll be the perfect weather for camping.
③ Don’t worry about your kids. They’ll like camping.
④ I feel the same. Outdoor activities make kids tired.
⑤ I’ll be also disappointed if they can’t come with me.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① You can be a good writer without any experience.
② I don’t think so. You should join the drama club first.
③ Yes, your drama club’s performance will be successful.
④ Absolutely. Your acting skill will help you with that job.
⑤ You have much experience in recording stories for the blind.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ellie가 Ryan에게 할 말로 가장 적절 한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ellie:   	
① I think we should choose another interesting topic.
② Let’s stick to the topic and focus on the presentation.
③ Why don’t we come up with as many topics as possible?
④ How about entering the research competition together?
⑤ We should try hard to save energy for the future.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how to choose the right career
② advantages of humans over robots
③ promising occupations in the future
④ jobs likely to be taken over by robots
⑤ use of robots for the safety of workers

17. 언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
① telemarketers	② cashiers
③ umpires	④ restaurant cooks
⑤ mail carriers
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 고객 맞춤 서비스를 홍보하려고
② 서비스 개선을 위한 제안을 부탁하려고
③ 단골 고객을 위한 특별 행사를 알리려고
④ 고객 불만 사항에 대한 시정 조치를 설명하려고
⑤ 홍보 책자에 편지를 싣는 것에 대한 허락을 구하려고

19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When we want something badly for our children, so badly that we behave in ways that aren’t helpful for our kids, it can mean we’re trying to fulfill a need for ourselves. It’s normal to feel good when your child wins, it’s normal to want him to win, but when you need him to win in order to feel good about yourself, you have a problem. For example, do you feel like having a child who is a winner proves you’re a worthwhile parent? Do you crave the recognition of being the parent of a star athlete? If you can answer yes to either question, you may be trying to feel good about yourself through your child’s athletic accomplishments. This is a very common problem. Be willing to take an honest look at yourself. The payoff is tremendous. You become a more aware sports parent who can offer true support and encouragement to your child.
① 전문가의 조언에 따라 자녀 문제에 대처하라.
② 자녀가 다양한 운동을 접할 기회를 제공하라.
③ 자녀가 시행착오를 통해 성장할 수 있도록 하라.
④ 자녀가 운동과 학습을 병행할 수 있는 환경을 조성하라.
⑤ 자기 기분을 위해 자녀의 승리를 원하는 게 아닌지 돌아보라.



영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The surface of the earth is different from place to place. Places differ in terms of population size, language, resources, environmental factors, industrial specialization, local history, and human activities. It is these differences from place to place that generate the demand for transportation. People want commodities that are not produced locally ? for example, fruits, vegetables, televisions, shoes, paper, and thousands of other goods ? and this desire generates the demand for transportation. Businesses need resources that are often not available locally, and this need generates the demand for transportation. We work, shop, and seek entertainment, for the most part, outside our own neighborhoods, necessitating a journey to work, to shop, and to visit the multiplex. Transportation enables us to carry out all these activities.
① 지역 간 차이 때문에 수송의 필요성이 생긴다.
② 경제가 발전한 나라일수록 수송 수단이 다양하다.
③ 경제 수준이 상승하면 여가 활동 시간이 증가한다.
④ 상품 가격에서 수송비가 차지하는 비중이 줄어들고 있다.
⑤ 환경 보호를 염두에 두고 교통수단을 개발할 필요가 있다.











21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Tradition is a critical element that cannot be ignored in the creation of architecture. Tradition is the essential element that allows a new work to connect with people on an emotional and intellectual level. The recollection of the familiar is one aspect of design that produces pleasure. This feeling of pleasure or satisfaction exists because we enjoy a sense of security among things that we know and understand. References to a previous tradition are a common component of most major architectural movements. While these movements utilized new technologies and building materials, or invented new building forms, each evoked an emotional response having its roots in an earlier tradition.
① tradition as an important factor in architecture
② efforts to express feelings in various arts
③ innovation in the use of building materials
④ new technologies utilized in modern buildings
⑤ effects of technological innovations on tradition
22. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There’s no subject you don’t have permission to write about. Students often avoid subjects close to their heart ― skateboarding, cheerleading, rock music, cars ― because they assume that their teachers will regard these topics as ‘stupid.’ No area of life is stupid to someone who takes it seriously. If you follow your affections, you will write well and will engage your readers. I’ve read elegant books on fishing, mountain climbing, giant sea turtles and many other subjects I didn’t think I was interested in. Write about your hobbies: cooking, gardening, photography, knitting, jogging, sailing, scuba diving. Write about your work: teaching, nursing, running a store. Write about a field you enjoyed in college and always meant to get back to: history, biography, art, archeology. No subject is too specialized if you make an honest connection with it when you write about it.
① Good Reading Leads to Good Writing
② Creativity Comes from Writing Regularly
③ Cultivation of Reading as a Lifetime Habit
④ Take Criticism from Your Readers Seriously
⑤ Want to Write Well? Go with Your Interests





23. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Measures People Take to Maintain Their Physical Health


　The above graph shows, by gender, the top five measures people took to maintain their physical health in 2014. ① Above all, the percentage of women was higher than that of men in all measures except in doing exercise.
② Getting enough sleep topped the list for both men and women. ③ Eating healthy food was the second most common measure for women, which was true also for men.
④ The percentage of the men receiving regular oral care was the same as that of the men spending time with friends and family. ⑤ The percentage gap between men and women was the biggest in receiving regular oral care, and was the smallest in getting enough sleep and in doing exercise.



4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

24. Maria Mitchell에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Maria Mitchell was born on August 1, 1818, in Nantucket, Massachusetts. Her awareness for astronomy came to life when her father began to teach her about the stars with the use of his own telescope. At twelve, she aided her father in calculating the exact moment of an annular eclipse. And at seventeen, she opened her very own school for girls, where she taught them science and math. Mitchell rocketed to the forefront of American astronomy when she spotted a comet through her telescope. For her discovery of the comet, she received a gold medal as a recognition from King Frederick VII of Denmark. This gave her worldwide fame, since the only previous women to discover a comet were the astronomers Caroline Herschel and Maria Margarethe Kirch. In 1865 Mitchell became a faculty member at Vassar College, making her the first female astronomy professor in the United States.

26. Trash­to­Art 2016에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?


① 아버지에게 별에 대해 배웠다.
② 여자아이들을 위한 학교를 열었다.
③ 덴마크 왕으로부터 금메달을 받았다.
④ 혜성을 발견한 최초의 여성이었다.

* annular eclipse: 금환 일식

⑤ Vassar College의 천문학 교수가 되었다.

25. Sandhill Pet Parade에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?





① Eco Recycling Center의 10주년 기념 행사이다.
② 출품작 접수는 3월 25일 하루만 가능하다.
③ 출품작은 4월부터 두 달간 Hopkins 도서관에서 전시된다.
④ 참가자당 작품을 최대 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
⑤ 건강을 위협하는 출품작은 거부될 수 있다.












① 시상은 오전 11시 30분에 시작한다.
② 참가비가 있으며 사전 등록을 해야 한다.
③ 참가 의상은 애완동물과 주인 둘 다에게 필수 사항이다.
④ 각 부문별로 3위까지 시상한다.
⑤ Hometown Days 행진 때 마차를 타는 수상 특전이 있다.
27. 
밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Carlos Sanchez’s long­time friend, Frank Sandoval, had fallen on hard times and was about to lose ① his home. Frank’s wife was sick and their two small children were temporarily staying with his mother. Carlos hadn’t talked to Frank for several months and decided one day to call him and see how ② he was. When Frank confided in Carlos about his situation, Carlos immediately went to Frank’s home. When he walked in, ③ he was shocked to see his friend so thin and frail. He sat down with Frank and asked him how much money ④ he needed. Frank told him it was hopeless, that it was too much to pay back. Carlos pulled out his checkbook and wrote ⑤ him a check for fifty thousand dollars. He told Frank that things would get better
― and they did. Three years later, Frank paid Carlos back with interest.



영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
　Water has no calories, but it takes up a space in your stomach, which creates a feeling of fullness. Recently, a  study found (A) that / what people  who drank  two  glasses of water before meals got full sooner,  ate  fewer  calories, and lost more weight. You can put the same  strategy  to work by choosing foods that have a higher water  content over those with less water. For example, the only difference between grapes and raisins (B) is / are that grapes have about 6 times as much water in them. That water makes a  big difference in how much they fill you up. You’ll feel much more satisfied after eating 100 calories’ worth  of  grapes  than you would after eating 100 calories’ worth of raisins. Salad vegetables like lettuce, cucumbers, and tomatoes also have a very high water content, as (C) are / do broth­based soups.
* broth: 묽은 수프
(A) (B)	(C)

① that
② that
······
······
is
is
······
······
are
do
③ that
······
are
······
do
④ what
······
is
······
are
⑤ what
······
are
······
do







29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　The basic task of the preschool years is to establish a sense of competence and initiative. The core struggle is between initiative and guilt. Preschool children begin to initiate many of their own activities as they become physically and psychologically ready to engage in pursuits of their own ① choosing. If they are allowed realistic freedom to make some of their own decisions, they tend to develop a
② positive orientation characterized by confidence in their ability to initiate and follow through. If their choices are ridiculed, however, they tend to experience a sense of guilt and ultimately to withdraw from taking an ③ active stance. One middle­aged woman we talked with still finds herself extremely vulnerable to being seen as ④ foolish. She recalls that during her childhood family members laughed at her attempts to perform certain tasks. She took in certain messages she received from her family, and these messages greatly influenced her attitudes and actions. Even now she vividly carries these pictures in her head, and these messages ⑤ cease to control her life.
30. 
다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I opened the letter and started reading. I didn’t even read the whole thing. I read only the beginning ― where it said, ‘We are pleased to inform you that you have received a scholarship that covers full tuition’ ― and I started jumping and running around the house. I couldn’t even believe it. I read the letter four more times. My dream school had offered me a full scholarship. That was more money than I could even imagine. All the stress, studying for exams, and staying up late to study ― it was all worth it.
① disappointed	② jealous	③ sympathetic
④ annoyed	⑤ delighted


[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. It takes time for water to soften a sponge. When you are telling an employee, lawn service worker, your teenager, or anyone else, what it is that you want them to do, you may just have to repeat the order and instructions several times before the receiver really gets what it is you want done. That’s not bad. That’s normal communication lag. Be
 	. When you are asking someone a question, in an effort to learn a fact that you feel is important for you to know, but they just don’t seem to be willing to give you an answer, take it as a signal that you need to rephrase your question a little and repeat it again, and again, and again, until finally you are heard and answered.
① patient	② honest	③ critical
④ thankful	⑤ curious


32. History is a discipline. It is the art of 	. As historian John Tosh writes, “All the resources of scholarship and all the historian’s powers of imagination must be harnessed to the task of bringing the past to life ? or resurrecting it.” The past is messy, but historians make sense of the mess by collecting evidence, making meaning of it, and organizing it into some kind of discernible pattern. History is an exciting act of interpretation ? taking the facts of the past and weaving them into a compelling narrative. The historian works closely with the stuff that has been left behind ? documents, oral testimony, objects ? to make the past come alive. As John Arnold has noted, “The sources do not ‘speak for themselves’ and never have done so. . . . They come alive when the historian reanimates them.” [3점]
* discernible: 식별할 수 있는
① predicting the future
② enlightening the youth
③ reconstructing the past
④ analyzing the present
⑤ improving humanity




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

33. While there is no denying that exceptional players like
Emmitt Smith can put points on the board and enhance team success, new research suggests there is a limit to the benefit top talents bring to a team. Researchers compared the amount of individual talent on teams with the teams’ success, and they found striking examples of
 	. The researchers looked at three sports: basketball, soccer, and baseball. In each sport, they calculated both the percentage of top talent on each team and the teams’ success over several years. For both basketball and soccer, they found that top talent did in fact predict team success, but only up to a point. Furthermore, there was not simply a point of diminishing returns with respect to top talent; there was in fact a cost. Basketball and soccer teams with the greatest proportion of elite athletes performed worse than those with more moderate proportions of top level players. [3점]
* diminishing returns: 수확 체감
① more talent hurting the team
② practice leading to perfection
③ top players being more cooperative
④ coaches being the key to team management
⑤ supporters interrupting the flow of the game



34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
　Healthy living in individuals lays the foundation for healthy living throughout society and the world. For instance, healthy relationships depend upon healthy individuals sharing personally and working mutually to develop win­win agreements on how to grow and maintain the relationship.
　　(A) , healthy parenting depends upon healthy parents. Children learn the foundations of how the world works and how to develop their personal reality relative to the consciousness and behaviors of their parents. They model and subconsciously embrace much of their parents’ behavior, so it becomes their own. Thus, the beliefs and behaviors of parents provide psychological and social information to the children that function almost like food does for the body; in this case, the information helps build their personal realities and shape their behaviors.  (B)  , psychological, social,  as well as the physical diets provided by parents must all be healthy or the children learn to repeat the unhealthy patterns of their parents.
(A) (B)
① Similarly	······ On the contrary
② Similarly	······ Consequently
③ For example ······ On the contrary
④ However	······ Otherwise
⑤ However	······ Consequently

[35 ~ 36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
35. 

(A) The answer is that they sit inside the gold crystal structure, taking the place of a gold atom, and it is this atom substitution inside the crystal lattice of the gold that makes it stronger.
(B) But if you alloy gold, by adding a small percentage of other metals such as silver or copper, you not only change the color of the gold ? silver making the gold whiter, and copper making the gold redder ? you make the gold harder, much harder.
(C) This changing of the properties of metals by very small additions of other ingredients is what makes the study of metals so fascinating. In the case of gold alloys, you might wonder where the silver atoms go.
* crystal lattice: 결정격자	** alloy: 합금(하다)
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

36. 

(A) It was the local practice, the colleague suggested, for lawyers to negotiate only with other lawyers, not with the businesspeople. Had the woman lawyer insisted on participating, she would have spoiled the deal and destroyed her credibility.
(B) Before voicing her objections, however, she called a colleague back in New York, who told her that he, too, had been excluded from preliminary talks during his last negotiation in that country. The Latin American executive was just looking for a diplomatic way to get her out of the picture as a lawyer, not as a woman.
(C) Soon after they arrived, the head of the prospective Latin American partner suggested that he and the CEO go off together to discuss business ― while his wife and the lawyer go shopping. The lawyer was outraged, assuming this to be an example of Latin American gender bias.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[37 ~ 38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37. 

　The most successful retirees are those who look at retirement as a long endeavor that can last 20 or 30 years or longer. ( ① ) They don’t throw all of their years of preparation away by investing in the next “hot stock” or investment idea. ( ② ) They’re very careful with their finances; they know they have to make sure that their money will last for the rest of their lives. ( ③ ) They stay conservative and focused on a finish line that is years and years away. ( ④ ) Even though they no longer have the comfort of a paycheck coming in, they still put their retirement nest egg at risk by chasing every hot tip that they get. ( ⑤ ) In other words, they are looking for short cuts to bring them financial stability and peace of mind.
* nest egg: 노후 자금









38. 
39. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　By some estimates, music based on oral tradition had previously seldom been performed for more than one or two generations. ① By contrast, with the coming of records not only were the “classics” preserved, but formerly ephemeral “hits” could now survive as “oldies.” ② So the music of one generation’s youth could be replayed years later to evoke memories in some (often quite narrow) age group of people.
③ Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms of course survived well beyond their social and cultural settings, taking on new meanings in the recordable world. ④ Bach mostly followed the complex rules of his day, while Beethoven challenged the rules, thus creating a new musical era. ⑤ Memories of falling in love or just being free and having fun also came to be linked to tunes that could be recalled or replayed again and again throughout life, thanks to the recording.
* ephemeral: 수명이 짧은



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Over the past century, society has witnessed extraordinary advances in medicine, science, and technology. ( ① ) These advances came about because an individual, or many individuals, used the full resources of his or her intellectual imagination to solve problems that had previously been thought to be unsolvable. ( ② ) That is, in part, because human beings rarely use the full resources of their intellect to solve moral problems. ( ③ ) Exercising moral imagination means using our intelligence to devise creative and innovative ways to help others. ( ④ ) Concerning charity, for example, it means not only providing immediate assistance to the impoverished, but also helping the poor in ways that will enable them to support themselves and no longer need help. ( ⑤ ) Therefore, in any situation in which help is required, we should use our intelligence to discover the most effective and loving way to help those in need. [3점]
* impoverished: 빈곤한









(A) (B)
① modify	······	reliable
② modify	······	enjoyable
③ reveal	······	reliable
④ memorize	······	enjoyable
⑤ memorize	······	comprehensible



8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
　On top of that, (c) he soon knew exactly how to make fishermen’s knots and how to untie tricky knots in his fishing lines. But Adrian wasn’t always keen to take his dad’s advice. When his dad showed him how to bait his hook, (d) he said that a little piece of the hook should always stick out, but Adrian thought otherwise. He thought it logical for the bait to hide the hook, so he ignored his dad ― but after quite a few days of catching nothing, decided to follow his dad’s advice.
(D)










41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① A Successful Blogger Knows How to Manage Comments
② Blogging Is a Good Way to Promote Your Business
③ Blog: A Window to See Another Foreign Culture
④ Share Hobbies with People Through Your Blog
⑤ Personal Information Slips Out of Your Blog

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?


① civility
② competition
③ independence
① (a)
② (b)
③
(c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
④ disbelief
⑤ privacy










[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　The last Saturday of each month was always a highlight in Adrian’s life. He and his dad had a regular fishing date. Adrian learned a lot about fishing and about life on these expeditions. (a) His father pointed out that there are some rocks that are too dangerous to go onto, even when the sea looks calm. It might look like a perfect spot for fishing, but rocks that are too close to the water’s edge can be deceptively dangerous.
45. 
윗글의 Adrian에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 아버지와 함께 정기적으로 낚시를 갔다.
② 올라가면 너무 위험한 바위가 몇 군데 있다는 말을 들었다.
③ 큰 물고기를 잡아 어머니께 드려 어머니를 기쁘게 했다.
④ 아버지의 조언에 따랐지만 며칠간 아무것도 잡지 못했다.
⑤ 물고기의 종류에 따라 어떤 미끼가 적합한지 배웠다.





제 3 교시

2016학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역




6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.






1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.

① Oh, no. I want to go there.
② Thanks, but they already ate.
③ Sorry. I completely forgot about it.
④ Of course. I’ll invite my friends tomorrow.
⑤ Not really. Soccer is not my favorite sport.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Sure. Here is your refund.
② Well, the shirt is not mine.
③ Okay. I’ll get you a new one.
④ Right. I need an eye for fashion.
⑤ Impossible. It’s a brand new shirt.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수강 신청을 안내하려고
② 고별 강연 참석을 독려하려고
③ 교내 논문 대회를 홍보하려고
④ 강의 일정 변경을 공지하려고
⑤ 새로 부임한 교수를 소개하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수업 시간에 전자기기를 사용하지 않아야 한다.
② 인터넷상에는 정확하지 않은 정보들이 존재한다.
③ 불규칙한 식습관은 학생들의 집중력을 저하시킨다.
④ 부모의 과도한 관심은 자녀의 학습 의욕을 감소시킨다.
⑤ 지나친 스마트폰 사용은 가족 간의 대화를 단절시킨다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 식당 지배인 ? 종업원	② 도서관 사서 ? 지역 주민
③ 제과점 주인 ? 손님	④ 컴퓨터 수리 기사 ? 고객
⑤ 방과 후 수업 교사 ? 학생
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 선택 관광 추가하기	② 예약 인원 변경하기
③ 계약금 환불해 주기	④ 관광 명소 추천하기
⑤ 이메일 재발송하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 운동하러 가지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 감기에 걸려서
② 고객을 만나야 해서
③ 발표 준비를 해야 해서
④ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
⑤ 동료와 식사를 해야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $270	② $280	③ $290	④ $300	⑤ $330


10. 대화를 듣고, 과학 시험에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 실시 날짜	② 문제 유형	③ 문항 개수
④ 진행 시간	⑤ 시험 범위


11. 봉사활동에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 다음 주 일요일에 하게 된다.
② 봉사자들은 결승선 구역에 배치된다.
③ 마라톤 참가자들에게 물과 음식을 나눠 주는 일이다.
④ 예상 활동 시간은 약 네 시간이다.
⑤ 봉사자들은 거북이가 그려진 모자를 받는다.






12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 다이어리를 고르시오.
Diaries



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Man:  	
① Great. I’m proud of you for being so generous.
② Actually, I would like to open a new bank account.
③ Sure. The camping trip was full of exciting events.
④ But raising money to help elderly people is not easy.
⑤ No. There are many charities for children in the world.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

Woman:  	
① You aren’t allowed to use a cell phone during the contest.
② You can record your practice to check your problems.
③ You don’t have to make too many friends online.
④ You need to finish writing your script first.
⑤ You should choose an easier topic.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Eric이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Eric: Sarah,  	
① I want you to respect her feelings.
② you need to clean the room more often.
③ I believe it’s better to rearrange your furniture.
④ you should tell her about your concerns frankly.
⑤ I doubt she might suffer from your carelessness.


[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① physical benefits of doing chores
② how to enhance creativity of children
③ ways of doing chores in an efficient way
④ the necessity of keeping a room organized
⑤ the importance of having children do chores

17. 언급된 일이 아닌 것은?
① 설거지하기	② 거실 청소하기	③ 꽃에 물 주기
④ 쓰레기 버리기	⑤ 빨래하기


18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 불량 제품 사용으로 인해 발생한 피해에 대해 항의하려고
② 제품 사용 주의사항을 잘 보이게 표기할 것을 제안하려고
③ 제품의 사용 설명서에 기재된 내용에 대해 문의하려고
④ 소비자의 취향을 반영한 신제품 개발을 요구하려고
⑤ 제품의 기능을 다양하게 할 것을 건의하려고





19. 다음 글에 드러난 Matt Brown의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? Early in his career as a pilot, Matt Brown was flying a twin-engine plane northeast out of Harlingen, Texas, when he
noticed a drop in oil pressure in his right engine. He was alone, flying through the night at eleven thousand feet. He reduced altitude and kept an eye on the oil gauge, hoping to fly as far as a planned fuel stop in Louisiana, where he could service the plane, but the pressure kept falling. Matt has been messing around with piston engines since he was old enough to hold a wrench, and he knew he had a problem. If he let the oil pressure get too low, he risked the engine’s stopping. How much further could he fly before shutting it down? What would happen when he did? He breathed heavily and felt the dreadful cold sweat running down his back.
① calm and relieved	② proud and contented
③ bored and indifferent	④ nervous and horrified
⑤ ashamed and regretful








20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Like cross-training, cross-eating adds needed variety to your life ― in this case, nutritional variety. Existing on a few dietary staples like bagels, bananas, and energy bars may leave you short on the fiber, vitamins, and minerals that are crucial for health. You should expand your nutrient repertoire. You can do this by trying a new food each week, or by getting in the habit of sampling new grains or pasta dishes at your local grocery store. Go for more variety at each meal by, for example, including two steamed vegetables and two grain foods (like rice and whole-grain bread) instead of a single source of each. Having more foods at each meal will also help control portion sizes, which may keep you from overloading on fat or sodium from one particular food.
* sodium: 나트륨

① 여러 가지 영양소를 섭취하기 위해 식단을 다양화하라.
② 지방이나 나트륨이 많이 함유된 음식을 가급적 피하라.
③ 한 번에 과식하기보다는 조금씩 여러 번 식사를 하라.
④ 영양 균형을 위해 가공식품의 과잉 섭취를 피하라.
⑤ 건강을 위해 규칙적인 식사와 운동을 생활화하라.

22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Work was once seen as human penance for evil beginnings in the Garden of Eden. Over the years, as socioeconomic classes arose in society in the Middle Ages, work began to be seen as the curse of the poor. The wealthy in society did all they could to avoid labor, perhaps except for war, which was seen as noble. Eventually enlightened philosophers such as St. Thomas Aquinas and his contemporaries taught that work was important, especially if we used our surplus to help others. Their teachings influenced reformers such as Martin Luther, who explained that work was virtuous if we had integrity and were honest in our dealings with our fellow men. Later, as America and Canada expanded into new territories, work in contemporary society was described as a privilege of the free. Then, as we entered the 1900s, Henry Ford and other industrialists convinced us that work led to progress for our society and our families.
* penance: 속죄

① various ways to improve working conditions
② changes in the perception of work over time
③ efforts to raise awareness about workers’ rights
④ influences of the working class on modern society
⑤ relationships between working hours and productivity












21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Guiding students’ progress through the math curriculum in a way that promotes successful, long-term learning and positive math attitudes requires paying attention to their different levels of achievable challenge and different learning strengths. Through this construct, students become engaged and open to acquiring the skills they need to progress to the next level. Individualized achievable challenge connects students to knowledge by communicating high expectations, confirming that they have the capacity to reach these goals, and showing them how to access the tools and support they need to reach goals they consider desirable. By engaging students and ensuring that they succeed frequently, we empower those who have math negativity by providing a sense of their growing knowledge of and appreciation for math.
① 기본 개념을 이해시키는 것이 수학적 응용력을 향상시킨다.
② 수학적 재능을 가진 학생을 조기에 발굴하는 것이 중요하다.
③ 놀이를 활용한 수업은 수학에 대한 흥미 유발에 효과적이다.
④ 생활 속 수학적 원리를 이용한 수업이 활성화될 필요가 있다.
⑤ 성취 가능한 개인별 도전 과제 부여가 수학 학습에 도움을 준다.
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Becoming indispensable can be as much about how you work as what you produce. Many employees believe they will receive the recognition they desire by attacking their work with a singular vision. They are driven with laser-beam focus, believing this will help them create optimal results that will showcase their talents and impress those at the top. But when you do this, something important is missing. A narrow focus tends to produce narrow results only valuable to your little corner of the company. The most successful employees are not those who focus solely on their own work. They are those who maintain a broader focus, keeping their tasks in line with what’s most important to the company and its future. Producing through the lens of the bigger picture will make your work seem larger than life, while work produced with a narrow focus is usually dismissed as “typical.”
① What Makes You a Confident Person?
② Take Initiative Rather than Standing Back
③ A Broader View: The Road to Success at Work
④ Talent: The Fruit of Efforts, Not Innate Ability
⑤ Can We Have Success Both at Work and at Home?








24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

영어 영역
26. Meditation Class에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?




 The two pie charts above show the change in percentage of five U.S. immigrant sources between 1960 and 2013. ① In 1960, Europe/Canada was the largest source of U.S. immigrants, but it dropped to fourth place in 2013. ② The largest source for the nation’s immigrants in 2013 was Mexico. ③ The percentage of Mexico and Other Latin America together only accounted for 10% in 1960, but it increased to more than 50% in 2013. ④ The percentage of immigrant population born in South/East Asia increased to 26% in 2013, which was more than seven times that of 1960. ⑤ Though Europe/Canada was a dominant source making up more than 80% of U.S. immigrants in 1960, no single source contributed more than 30% in 2013.






25. North Yungas Road에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? North Yungas Road, known as ‘Death Road,’ connects the Yungas region of northern Bolivia to the capital, La Paz. The
road was built in the 1930s during the Chaco War by Paraguayan prisoners of war. Starting from La Paz, this road first climbs to 4,650 meters, and then gradually descends to 1,200 meters at the town of Coroico. This drop is one of the longest stretches of continuous downhill road in the world. It’s mostly a single-lane road with no guard rails, and it has cliffs of up to 600 meters. The hazards include landslides and tumbling rocks, constant fog, tropical downpours and limited visibility. Unlike the rest of Bolivia, one of the local road rules specifies that vehicles are required to drive on the left side of the road to give the driver a better view of the vehicle’s outside wheel and make passing safer.


Meditation Class
Relieve your stress
and create a sense of lasting peace!
This class is suitable for
both beginners and experienced meditators.
? Class Schedule
- This four-week class will start from May 2. (7:00 p.m. - 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday)
? Tuition & Class Size
- No tuition (supported by the local government)
- A maximum of 30 people
? Notice
- Please bring your own yoga mat to class as we don’t provide any.
- No special clothing is required.
- Register at our website, www.meditationcool.com

① 초보자에게는 적절하지 않다.
② 4주간 주말마다 진행된다.
③ 수강 인원은 최대 30명까지이다.
④ 수강자에게 요가 매트를 제공한다.
⑤ 특별한 복장이 필요하다.

27. Avana Park Bake Off에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



Join our seventh annual baking contest and show off your baking skills.
Saturday, May 14, 2016, 2 p.m. - 4 p.m. at Avana Park
Judging will be based not only on taste but also on creativity.
Prizes will be given to the top three cakes.
1st prize: a kitchenware set 2nd prize: a coffeepot
3rd prize: a cookbook
? The entry fee is $20 per contestant.
? Entries are limited to one cake per contestant.
? Public cake tasting will begin at 5 p.m.
? All proceeds will be donated to Avana House, the local charity that helps homeless people in the community.
　　For more information, please visit www.avanapark.org



① 전쟁 포로들에 의해 만들어졌다.
② 세계에서 가장 긴 내리막길 중 하나가 있다.
③ 대부분이 가드레일이 없는 일차선 도로이다.
④ 지속적인 안개와 열대성 폭우 같은 위험이 있다.
⑤ 차량을 도로의 오른편에서 운행해야 한다.

① 일곱 번째 개최되는 연례 대회이다.
② 맛과 창의성을 바탕으로 심사한다.
③ 출품작은 참가자당 케이크 하나로 제한된다.
④ 케이크 시식은 오후 다섯 시에 시작된다.
⑤ 모든 수익금은 국제 자선단체에 기부된다.
4	8





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
 We all want to believe that our brains sort through information in the most rational way ① possible. On the contrary, countless studies show that there are many weaknesses of human reasoning. Common weaknesses in reasoning ② exist across people of all ages and educational backgrounds. For example, confirmation bias is ubiquitous. People pay attention to information that supports their viewpoints, while ③ ignoring evidence to the contrary. Confirmation bias is not the same as being stubborn, and is not constrained to issues ④ about which people have strong opinions. Instead, it acts at a subconscious level to control the way we gather and filter information. Most of us are not aware of these types of flaws in our reasoning processes, but professionals who work to convince us of certain viewpoints
⑤ to study the research on human decision making to determine how to exploit our weaknesses to make us more susceptible to their messages.
* ubiquitous: 아주 흔한










29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　With a power gap, the more hierarchical your culture or background, the greater the power gap is apt to be. This is because hierarchical cultures (A) decrease / reinforce the differences between managers and employees. If you tend to be more hierarchical in your orientation, you tend to put those in positions of authority at a higher level, and there is more respect for that status or position, divorced even from the person who occupies it. (B) Distance / Friendliness is seen as good if you have a hierarchical preference. It wouldn’t be proper for a manager to be too familiar with his employees. The effect is that any power gap that exists is magnified through the lens of this dimension. A greater power gap can result in decreased communication as well as increased misunderstandings and conflict, potentially leading to (C) missed / unlimited opportunities for building significant business and career relationships.

(A) (B)	(C)
① decrease …… Distance …… missed
② decrease …… Friendliness …… unlimited
③ reinforce …… Distance …… missed
④ reinforce …… Friendliness …… unlimited
⑤ reinforce …… Distance  …… unlimited
30. 
밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 While working at the cash register in a shop, a young college student saw an elderly couple come in with their granddaughter in a wheelchair. The cashier looked closely at the child; ① she had no arms or legs. As the couple wheeled her up to the counter, the college student turned her head toward the girl and gave ② her a wink. As she took the money from the child’s grandparents, she looked back at the girl, who gave her a beaming smile. All of a sudden the child’s disability was gone and all the young student saw was this beautiful girl; ③ her smile was breathtaking and gave the college student a completely new sense of life. ④ She took the young cashier from being an unhappy college student into her world of smiles, love, and warmth. Several years later as a successful business person, the once unhappy college student remembered the remarkable lesson about life that the child taught ⑤ her that day.

[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. If we can’t have everything we want today, what do we do? We are forced to make choices. We must choose some goods
and services and not others. Sometimes this kind of choosing can be visibly painful. Have you ever watched children in a toy store with a gift certificate in hand? It can take them all day before they make a choice. And instead of bubbling with excitement over the toy they bought, they usually appear frustrated over not being able to walk away with everything! Life is like that. 	governs us. Because we cannot have everything all at once, we are forever forced to make choices. We can use our resources to satisfy only some of our wants, leaving many others unsatisfied. [3점]
① Scarcity	② Morality	③ Knowledge
④ Reputation	⑤ Compassion
32. Establishing protected areas with intact ecosystems is essential for species conservation. It is, however, shortsighted
to rely solely on protected areas to preserve biodiversity. Such reliance can create a paradoxical situation in which species and ecosystems inside the protected areas are preserved while the same species and ecosystems outside are allowed to be damaged, which in turn results in 	. This is due in part to the fact that many species must migrate across protected area boundaries to access resources that the protected area itself cannot provide. In India, for example, tigers leave their protected areas to hunt in the surrounding human-dominated landscape. In general, the smaller the protected area, the more it depends on unprotected neighboring lands for the long-term maintenance of biodiversity. Unprotected areas, including those immediately outside protected areas, are thus crucial to an overall conservation strategy. [3점]
① the decline of biodiversity within the protected areas
② the fall in migration of species to the unprotected areas
③ the increase of predators’ migration to the protected areas
④ the balance and harmony between humanity and biodiversity
⑤ the improvement in preserving human-dominated landscapes





영어 영역

33. Our kitchens owe much to the brilliance of science, and a cook experimenting with mixtures at the stove is often not
very different from a chemist in the lab: we add vinegar to red cabbage to fix the color and use baking soda to counteract the acidity of lemon in the cake. It is wrong to suppose, however, that 	. It is something more basic and older than this. Not every culture has had formal science ― a form of organized knowledge about the universe that starts with Aristotle in the fourth century BC. The modern scientific method, in which experiments form part of a structured system of hypothesis, experimentation, and analysis is as recent as the seventeenth century; the problem-solving technology of cooking goes back thousands of years. Since the earliest Stone Age humans cut raw food with sharpened flints, we have always used invention to devise better ways to feed ourselves. [3점]

① science has nothing to do with philosophy
② a hypothesis can be proved by a single experiment
③ technology is just the appliance of scientific thought
④ cooking has always been independent from formal science
⑤ food is cooked only through the problem-solving technology












34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 For any product, the last step of the recycling process is selling the new product. Unfortunately, it can be hard to find markets for some types of recyclables. Plastic companies generally prefer new plastic,  (A)     , because it is of more consistent quality than recycled plastic. The new plastic is guaranteed to be free of incompatible polymers ― the chemical from which plastics are made ― that sometimes are mixed in when the plastic is not sorted well before recycling. Manufacturers say it is also easier to control the color of plastics that have no recycled content. (B) , paper manufacturers complain that recycled paper often gets dirty during collection and sorting. The added expense of cleaning the paper makes it too expensive to use for some purposes.

(A) (B)
① for instance …… Instead
② for instance …… Similarly
③ therefore …… In contrast
④ however …… Moreover
⑤ however …… In short

[35 ~ 36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. 


(A) In other words, traditional housing approaches were specific to the culture, climate, and environment. Consider the igloo, a building using the thermal mass of ice to enclose heat and resist snow, or the ancient Egyptians’ ventilation domes that produced interior cooling amid burning desert heat.
(B) Housing, likewise, originally developed slowly within particular human cultures and in response to specific climates and environments. Each culture around the world crafted a unique style of housing from the fabric of their surroundings.
(C) The miracle becomes even more amazing when you consider the long, slow, evolutionary process of give and take that produced the human body. Our bodies developed with nature, within it, as part of it, over time.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



36. 


(A) This means a little bit of stimulation to a teenage brain whose synapses are firing all over the place leads to wanting more stimulation that can, in certain situations, result in a kind of overlearning. The more commonly known name for this overlearning is addiction.
(B) These abilities give them a distinct advantage over adults, but because they are so primed to learn, they are also extremely vulnerable to learning the wrong things. How does this happen?
(C) It is all because the brain wants rewards and anything that is learned, good or bad, that stimulates the production of dopamine is interpreted by the brain as a reward.
* synaptic plasticity: 시냅스 가소성 ** primed: 준비가 되어 있는

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


	





[37 ~ 38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37. 


 Undoing a negative tie begins with giving up something of value rather than asking for a “fair trade.” If you give and then ask for something right away in return, you don’t establish a relationship; you carry out a transaction. ( ① ) When done correctly, reciprocity is like getting the pump ready. ( ② ) In the old days, pumps required lots of effort to produce any water. ( ③ ) You had to repeatedly work a lever to eliminate a vacuum in the line before water could flow. ( ④ ) Reciprocity with a rival works in much the same way. ( ⑤ ) Reflect carefully on what you should give and, ideally, choose something that requires little effort from the other party to reciprocate.














38. 
39. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Not until the rise of ecology at the beginning of the twentieth century did people begin to think seriously of land as a natural system with interconnecting parts. ① A century earlier, Thomas Jefferson had vigorously promoted an orderly division of the American land, beginning with the Northwest Territory.
② Surveyors were sent forth to draw rectangular grids on the land, dividing the wilds into counties, townships, and ultimately homesteads, with little concern for terrain or other natural features. ③ They adopted the environmentally friendly system even though they did not see a profit in it. ④ That system had its virtues, but in time ecology made the lines appear artificial.
⑤ As some observers would come to see it, the rectangular grid system caused as much harm as it did good.
* homestead: 정부 공여 농지







40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





 Unfortunately many organizations and political leaders working to improve environmental and social conditions operate unquestioningly from within the paradigm. ( ① ) However, to paraphrase Einstein, problems cannot be solved from within the same paradigm in which they were created. ( ② ) A good example is the cap and trade approach to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. ( ③ ) In this scenario, private companies are permitted to sell their “right” to pollute to other companies, which can then pollute more, in the belief that the free hand of the market will find the most efficient opportunities for greenhouse gas reductions. ( ④ ) But viewing pollution as a “right” and relying on the market to solve environmental problems reinforces the very paradigm that got us into this mess. ( ⑤ ) The right to clean air and a healthy climate would win over the right to pollute. [3점]
* cap and trade: 배출권 거래제









(A) (B)
① exposed to	…… matched
② exposed to	…… narrowed
③ distracted by …… contradicted
④ reminded of …… determined
⑤ reminded of …… changed









[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
































41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

영어 영역




(B)











(C)












(D)



① Save Selectively, Save Your Effort!
② Cheap Storage Drives Us to Keep It All
③ How to Cope with Financial Difficulties
④ Benefits of Deleting Your Online History
⑤ Why Is Time More Precious than Money?

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① follows	② creates	③ balances
④ exceeds	⑤ eliminates



[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)




43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D) ③ (C) - (D) - (B)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)	⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Angela에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 한 회사의 법률 분석가로 일했다.
② 법률 서적 읽는 것을 즐긴 적이 없었다.
③ 연극 공연을 홍보하는 이메일을 동료에게 보냈다.
④ 대학 시절에 연기를 했었다.
⑤ 고등학교 연극 교사가 되었다.







제 3 교시

2017학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. That’s the best place.
② Well, it’s too far away from here.
③ Probably, but the trip was cancelled.
④ No way. I cannot be there tomorrow.
⑤ Yes, they said it’s going to rain.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① You should have been more careful.
② Thanks for showing me your recipe.
③ That’s why onions make you healthy.
④ Please, help me chop the onions.
⑤ You’re such a great cook.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 등교 시간 변경을 알리려고
② 아침 급식 실시를 공지하려고
③ 학생증 발급 절차를 설명하려고
④ 학교 식당 내의 질서 유지를 당부하려고
⑤ 건강에 유익한 아침 식단을 추천하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 일을 결정하기 전에 함께 할 사람들과 상의해야 한다.
② 자원봉사 시 도움 받는 이의 감정을 고려해야 한다.
③ 작은 자선행위라도 모이면 큰 힘을 발휘할 수 있다.
④ 지역사회의 행사에 적극적으로 참여해야 한다.
⑤ 예술 동아리 활동은 정서 발달에 도움이 된다.




5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
①  소설가 - 서점 직원	② 화가 - 전시 기획자
③ 시나리오 작가 ? 영화감독	④ 번역가 - 잡지사 편집장
⑤ 책 표지 디자이너 ? 출판사 직원



7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 책 반납하기	② 잡지 기사 복사하기
③ 발표 대본 검토하기	④ 물리학 노트 빌려주기
⑤ 신문 기사 스크랩하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 동창 모임에 참석할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 해외 출장을 가야 해서
② 승진 시험에 응시해야 해서
③ 가족 행사에 참석해야 해서
④ 병원 진료가 예약되어 있어서
⑤ 회사 동료의 결혼식에 가야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36	② $40	③ $54	④ $56	⑤ $60


10. 대화를 듣고, Korean Speech Contest에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 대상	② 연설 주제	③ 원고 분량
④ 시상 인원	⑤ 신청 기간


11. Caribbean Grand Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10개가 넘는 명소가 있다.
② 돌고래와 함께 수영을 할 수 있다.
③ 어린이를 위한 자연 체험 프로그램이 있다.
④ 마야 전통 춤 공연이 일 년 내내 진행된다.
⑤ 밤에 빛과 색을 이용한 쇼가 열린다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구매할 피아노를 고르시오.
Digital Pianos

①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Just your phone number is enough.
② Don’t forget to bring your textbook.
③ I don’t remember who the driver was.
④ A lot of lost property is never claimed.
⑤ Your ID card has not been proven valid.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① I think I shouldn’t have bought it online.
② It was great to learn how to use an AED.
③ I’ll let you know a place you can get training.
④ More of them must be installed in this building.
⑤ It’s dangerous for an amateur to teach how to use it.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Kate가 Michael에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Kate:  	
① How about posting an ad in the local newspaper?
② Visit the community center for more information.
③ You can open a flea market to raise funds.
④ Why don’t you join more sports programs?
⑤ I would suggest cancelling the event.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① tips for cooking foods high in protein
② factors that interrupt protein intake
③ health benefits of protein­rich foods
④ the amount of protein needed each day
⑤ ways to get enough protein from vegetables

17. 언급된 식품이 아닌 것은?
① eggs	② chicken breast	③ black rice
④ peanuts	⑤ cheese


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 보육시설 개관식에 초대하려고
② 어린이집 환경 개선을 건의하려고
③ 주민센터 이용 수칙을 안내하려고
④ 신규 사업에 대한 투자를 권유하려고
⑤ 보육교사 양성과정 수강생을 모집하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When my turn came, I was very confident. It was as if I knew, without a doubt, that the talented side of me really did exist. I had no fear whatsoever, no nervousness. I looked out over the audience, and I started to play. It was so beautiful. I was so caught up in how lovely I looked that at first I didn’t worry how I would sound. So it was a surprise to me when I hit the first wrong note and I realized something didn’t sound quite right. And then I hit another, and another followed that. A chill started at the top of my head and began to spread. Yet I couldn’t stop playing, as though my hands were bewitched. I played this strange mess through two repeats, the sour notes staying with me all the way to the end.
① sorrowful → delighted	② self­assured → embarrassed
③ scared	→ relieved	④ anticipating → proud
⑤ excited	→ bored

20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Coach Wooden often described his team as a finely tuned automobile. The top scorer or “star” of the team is the engine. But, no matter how powerful your engine is, you won’t get very far if you don’t have any wheels. Great scorers need ball handlers and passers to get them the ball. Those who play tenacious defense and put the ball in the scorer’s hands are the wheels. And what of the players at the end of the bench who rarely get in the game? They are the nuts and bolts that hold the wheels in place. Thus, every member of the team is important, from the players on the court to the people who pick up the towels in the locker room. And no one knows when each team member will have the greatest impact: the greatest element in stardom is the rest of the team.	* tenacious: 집요한, 끈질긴
① 꾸준한 연습이 경기력 향상의 가장 큰 원동력이다.
② 자만심은 경기 결과에 부정적인 영향을 줄 수 있다.
③ 팀에서 구심점 역할을 하는 스타 선수 육성이 필요하다.
④ 실적에 기초한 구성원의 비교는 위화감을 조성할 수 있다.
⑤ 팀의 성공적인 수행을 위해 모든 구성원의 역할이 중요하다.




영어 영역	3

21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In the drama of the theater, suspense follows a predictable recipe. Suspense occurs when well­liked main characters struggle to overcome obstacles and cope triumphantly with threats and dangers to their well­being. Such events occasion hopes and fears in the audience ― hopes for positive outcomes and fears of negative outcomes to the liked persons. Suspense thrives on hopes and fears. Seeing the hero battle obstacles and overcome crises engages the viewer in an emotional struggle in which the drama’s storyline and its conclusion events carry an emotional impact that would otherwise be missing. For instance, we feel little curiosity upon watching a Pony Express rider deliver mail at the next outpost, but we feel great curiosity via suspense if that same rider is a Western hero who loses his horse to a hostile environment, overcomes rattlesnake bites, outsmarts evil­minded outlaws, and otherwise fights his way triumphantly to the next outpost.
① how suspense is developed in drama
② factors that make suspense movies popular
③ the use of dramas to heal emotional problems
④ reasons we can predict the storylines in drama
⑤ our tendency to make stories from our experiences







[22~23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. We humans share our understanding of “what is out there” in the world, but we are not entirely born into it. We all begin in a kind of sensory chaos ― what William James called an “aboriginal sensible muchness”: a more or less undifferentiated mass of sounds and lights, colors and textures and smells. When we are growing up, we learn to bring attention to certain elements and to ignore others. By adulthood, we all agree on what is “out there.” But let’s focus on what we ignore: so much! The patterns of pebbles
in asphalt, the pitch of a radiator’s hiss, our own heart beating tangibly in our fingertips and temples. The infant has a mind unrestricted by experience: he has no expectations, so he is not closed off from experiencing something anew.
* aboriginal: 원래의 ** temple: 관자놀이

① Adults, Better Learners Than Kids
② The Outer Space: Orders in Chaos
③ We Notice Less Than We Are Able To!
④ Common Sense: Too Important to Ignore
⑤ How Do Infants Build Their Attention Spans?
23. 
One of the common problems of sensitive people is an excess of delta brainwaves. If you are one of these people, you might appear overly sensitive to the thoughts, feelings, and needs of other people. Your unconscious mind is picking up too many stimuli from the outside world and absorbing them inappropriately. What do you do with these stimuli? A common response is to assume that other people’s painful emotions are your own, with very little differentiation between what is yours and what is not yours. Or, because you are more aware of  other  people’s  discomforts,  you might feel a need  to  take  responsibility  for  them ―to fix them.     Sometimes this desire  to fix them is simply an urge   to alleviate the pain that you are feeling yourself as a result of being too interconnected with others’ emotions. Sometimes it is a more complex psychological game: because you can feel it so strongly, you must somehow have caused it. Therefore you feel guilty unless you do something about it.

① What Is Happening in the Minds of Sensitive People
② Your Behaviors Affect Your Unconscious Mind
③ Guilt: The Product of Excessive Desire
④ Control Your Negative Emotional Triggers
⑤ Being Sensitive Is Good for Your Mental Health



24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The graph above illustrates the number of people Canadians could turn to for support in an emergency by type of help in 2014. ① More than half of Canadians surveyed reported more than 5 people that they could count on if they  needed emotional support, help with a physical injury, or a place to stay or help in an evacuation. ② For the same types of help, more than 30% reported 1to 5 people they could rely on for assistance. ③ Financial support, however, shows a different pattern, with just 24% indicating that there were more than 5 people they could turn to. ④ Still, over half of individuals reported having 1 to 5 people that could assist them financially in an emergency. ⑤ In each category of help, except for financial support, more than 10% of respondents said that they had no one to rely on for assistance.
* evacuation: 피난, 대피




4	영어 영역


25. Charles Richard Drew에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Charles Richard Drew was born in 1904 in Washington, D.C. Drew graduated from McGill University Medical School in Montreal, Canada, ranking second in a class of 137. Drew did graduate work and earned his doctorate of medical science from	Columbia	University.	Drew’s	research	led	to	the discovery that blood plasma could replace whole blood in transfusions. He set up and administered the British blood bank from 1940 to 1941, and also served as medical director of the American Red Cross project to collect and store blood in 1941. Drew was dropped from the American Red Cross project because he objected to the policy of refusing the blood of black donors. He asserted that there was no scientific difference between the blood of blacks and whites. In 1950, he was seriously injured in a car accident in Alabama and died
from having lost too much blood.

27. Arizona Student Film Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

* blood plasma: 혈장

① 137명 중 2등으로 McGill 의과 대학을 졸업했다.
② Columbia 대학에서 의학 박사 학위를 받았다.
③ 영국 혈액은행을 설립하고 운영했다.
④ 흑인 기증자의 혈액을 거부하는 방침에 동조했다.
⑤ 자동차 사고로 인한 과다 출혈로 사망했다.




26. 2017 Melbourne Marathon에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?




















Course
Start Time
Admission
Full Marathon
7:00 a.m.
$155
Half Marathon
8:00 a.m.
$120
10 km Run
7:30 a.m.
$59
5.7 km Run
11:00 a.m.
$44
3 km Walk
11:15 a.m.
$35


① 초보자가 선택할 수 있는 코스가 있다.
② 수익금이 심장병 연구에 지원된다.
③ 출발 장소와 도착 장소가 동일하다.
④ 하프 마라톤 참가비는 120달러이다.
⑤ 10 km 달리기가 가장 일찍 시작된다.

① 고등학생은 참가할 수 없다.
② 출품작의 길이는 8분 이상이어야 한다.
③ 주말을 제외하고 9일 동안 진행된다.
④ 선정된 작품은 Phoenix Film Festival에서 상영된다.
⑤ 출품작은 DVD나 CD로 제출되어야 한다.





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　There is a reason that prey animals form foraging groups, and that is increased vigilance. An individual redshank is faced with a choice when feeding. It could spend all of its time being vigilant, looking out for approaching ① predators. If it did so, it would certainly significantly reduce the chance that it would be taken by surprise, but it would also
② starve. A bird with its head in the air scanning for predators cannot at the same time have its head down searching for food. In reality of course an individual balances the two behaviors in accordance with the situation in which it finds itself, and as a member of a group it can shift the balance towards ③ feeding. The bigger the flock of birds, the less time an individual bird devotes to ④ relaxation. This is possible because the ⑤ presence of many sets of eyes in the flock effectively means that there is always somebody on the look out.
* vigilance: 경계




영어 영역	5

29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The most dramatic and significant contacts between civilizations were ① when people from one civilization conquered and eliminated the people of another. These contacts normally were not only violent but brief, and ② they occurred only occasionally. Beginning in the seventh century A.D., relatively ③ sustained and  at  times intense intercivilizational contacts did develop between Islam and the West and Islam and India. Most commercial, cultural, and military interactions, however, were within civilizations. While India and China, for instance, were on occasion invaded and subjected by other peoples (Moguls, Mongols), both civilizations ④ having extensive times of “warring states” within their own civilization as well. Similarly, the Greeks fought each other and traded with each other far more often than they ⑤ did with Persians or other non­Greeks.






















30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Sir Humphry Davy recognized ‘the potential scientist’ in Michael Faraday. At that time Davy was working on chlorine.
① He was working very hard to prove that chlorine was an element and not a compound of oxygen as held by many scientists of the day. Davy encouraged Faraday to assist him in ② his experiments, and Faraday agreed with great enthusiasm. In October 1813, Davy went upon a tour of Europe along with ③ his wife. He asked Faraday to accompany him as ④ his assistant. Faraday’s pleasure knew no bounds on this bonus offer. He accepted the offer and went along with Davy and his wife and a few others. Till then, Faraday had not seen much outside London. Davy’s offer was simply exciting. Faraday had to resign his job before going on the tour. However, Davy promised to reappoint ⑤ him on their returning from the tour. The tour was a wonderful opportunity for self­education.
* chlorine: [화학] 염소

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. In a classic experiment from 1972, participants were divided into two groups. The members of the first group were told that they would receive a small electric shock. In the second group, subjects were told that the risk of this happening was only 50 percent. The researchers measured physical anxiety (heart rate, nervousness, sweating, etc.) shortly before starting. The result was, well, shocking:
There was absolutely no difference. Participants in both groups were equally stressed. Next, the researchers announced a series of reductions in the probability of a shock for the second group: from 50 percent to 20 percent, then 10 percent, then 5 percent. The result: still no difference! However, when they declared they would increase the strength of the expected current, both groups’ anxiety levels rose ? again, by the same degree. This illustrates that we respond to the expected magnitude of an event, but not to its 	. [3점]

① utility	② source	③ novelty
④ likelihood	⑤ duration








32. How can a design innovate successfully? By 	, always considering the interaction between the new ideas and the current work practice. Consider the history of the word processor. Originally, everyone used typewriters, and typing became the work model  users understood.  Early word processors stayed close to the typewriter model. They just provided better typing and better correction. Then word
processors introduced cut and paste ? metaphors taken from the physical operations of cutting with scissors and pasting with glue, something everyone had to do already. These features were an easy extension of the model. Then word processors introduced multiple buffers and multiple documents open at a time, making it easy to share and transfer text across documents. Then they introduced automatic word­wrapping and multiple fonts, and desktop publishing was born. Each step was an easy increment over the previous, and each step walked the user community a little further away from the typewriter model. [3점]
* increment: 증가
① taking one step at a time
② introducing a few constraints
③ discarding the old for the new
④ testing new ideas confidentially
⑤ weakening regulations on technologies




6	영어 영역


33. It is important to understand the distinction between energy and power. While units of energy measure the total quantity of work done, they don’t tell us how fast that work is being accomplished. For example, you could lift a one­ton rock up the side of a mountain using only a small electric motor and a system of pulleys, but it would take a long time. A more powerful electric motor could do the job faster, while a still more powerful rocket engine could rapidly propel a payload of identical weight to the top of the
mountain in a matter of seconds. Power is therefore defined as the 	. Think of it as energy per unit of time. The standard unit of electrical power is the watt (W). The amount of electrical energy a 10 W light bulb uses depends on how long it is lit: in one hour, it will use 10 Wh of energy. In the same amount of time, a hundred thousand such bulbs would use 1000 kilowatt­hours (kWh), which equals 1 megawatt­hour (MWh). [3점]

① process of gradually improving a system
② rate at which energy is produced or used
③ maximum strength that a machine can exert
④ capacity to convert electricity to something else
⑤ possession of control or command over something






34. To some participants, the principal value of fair trade lies not in changing the logic of markets but in
 	. Unequal terms of trade, protective tariffs, quality standards, and other barriers have long combined to deny farmers in the global South, both small and large, access to profitable consumer markets in the rich nations. At the same time, they watch as their economies are flooded by the dumping of heavily subsidized, impossibly cheap food and consumer products from abroad that undermine their efforts simply to make ends meet. In this view, then, trade justice consists of facilitating access for producers to the Northern markets from which they have traditionally been excluded. This is the stance of many producer groups in the South, some of the Alternative Trading Organizations that work directly with them, some for­profit businesses engaged in fair trade, and many certifying organizations. [3점]
* tariff: 관세 ** the global South: 제3세계


① limiting damage to the environment
② righting the market’s historic injustices
③ preserving native cultures in the South
④ demanding corporate investment in agriculture
⑤ increasing production capacity of disadvantaged producers
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Robots are mechanical creatures that we make in the laboratory, so whether we have killer robots or friendly robots depends on the direction of AI research. ① In the West, much of the funding comes from the military, which is specifically given authority to win wars, so killer robots are a definite possibility. ② However, since 30 percent of all commercial robots are manufactured in Japan, there is another possibility: robots will be designed to become helpful playmates and workers from the very beginning. ③ The purpose for developing robot characters in online games is to make the players get enthusiastic. ④ This goal is within reach if the consumer sector dominates robotics research.
⑤ The philosophy of “friendly AI” is that inventors should create robots that, from the very first steps, are programmed to be beneficial to humans.














[36~37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) All you need to know is how far apart your eyes are, and you can calculate the distance from eyes to finger by the size of the hops. That is the parallax method of estimating distances.
(B) Hold your finger up in front of your face and look at it with your left eye closed. Now open your left eye and close your right. Keep switching eyes, and you’ll notice that the apparent position of your finger hops from side to side.
(C) That is because of the difference between the viewpoints of your two eyes. Move your finger nearer, and the hops will become greater. Move your finger farther away and the hops become smaller.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) But in real­world observations, we cannot control many factors; this makes it difficult to pinpoint what it is that causes the behavior that we are studying. Moreover, even where some experimentation is permitted, human beings frequently modify their behavior simply because they know they are being observed in a social science experiment.
(B) For example, we cannot deliberately subject people to poverty and deprivation in order to make the necessary observations about causes of violence. In a laboratory, we can control all or most of the factors that go into the experimental situation.
(C) This  phenomenon,   known   as   the   Hawthorne                      effect, makes it difficult to determine whether the observed behavior is a product of the stimulus being introduced or merely a product of the experimental situation itself.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



[38~39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.



　Attitudes to measuring in the kitchen tend to be polarized. On the one hand, there are creative spirits who claim that they never weigh or measure anything. ( ① ) If you ask for a recipe from such a person, you will be told airily, “Oh, I never look at a cookbook”; if they do consult recipes, they happily play fast and loose with quantities. ( ② ) Every meal they cook is pure invention, pure instinct: cooking is an art and cannot be reduced to numbers. ( ③ ) They view recipes as strict formulas, not to be changed. ( ④ ) If a recipe calls for 325 ml double cream and a carton contains only 300 ml, then such people will anxiously buy a second carton to make up the shortfall. ( ⑤ ) People in this group are more likely to think that what they are doing is scientific, the idea being that the more we can measure and pin cooking down, the more like science it will be.





40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

38.


　Any gene exerts its maximum effect on bodies at some particular stage of life, and lethals and semilethals are not exceptions. ( ① ) Most genes exert their influence during foetal life, others during childhood, others during young adulthood, others in middle age, and yet  others  in old age. ( ② ) Obviously lethal genes will tend to be removed from the gene pool. ( ③ ) A gene that is lethal in an older body may still be successful in the gene pool, provided its lethal effect does not show itself until after the body has had time to do at least some reproducing. ( ④ ) For instance, a gene that made old bodies develop cancer could be passed on to numerous offspring because the individuals would reproduce before they got cancer. ( ⑤ ) On the other hand, a gene that made young adult bodies develop cancer would not be passed on to very many offspring, and a gene that made young children develop fatal cancer would not be passed on to any offspring at all. [3점]
* lethal: 치사 유전자 ** foetal: 태아의











?
Certain 	(A)	values that exist in one culture also exist in another culture but 	(B)	.

(A) (B)
① moral	……	in reverse
② moral	……	in turn
③ traditional	……	temporarily
④ opposing	……	in reverse
⑤ opposing	……	temporarily




8	영어 영역

[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)
　He was quite pleased with himself for placing his cards on the discard pile and was naturally crushed when the three other boys all told (c) him the move was not allowed in that particular game, that they were “not playing that way.” Timmy took his cards back, but (d) his bottom lip began to quiver. Seeing that vulnerability, cruel Travis began circling for the kill. “What? Are you about to cry? It’s just a game! And you’re going to cry? Look at Timmy, everyone, he’s crying! What a big baby!”









41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Curiosity Leads to Discovery
② Does Science Provide a Better Life?
③ What Motivates the Funding for Science?
④ The Greatest Scientific Studies of All Time
⑤ Nuclear Physics: A Promising Field of Science
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A)

(B)
①
For example
……
Similarly
②
For example
……
However
③
Accordingly
……
Moreover
④
Furthermore
……
In contrast
⑤
Furthermore
……
Therefore

[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　Andrew Marks was in my sixth­grade homeroom and was bright, kind, rosy­che ked, well dressed, and a little chub y. During recess one day, Andrew got involved in a card game of Uno with three other boys: Timmy, Travis, and a fourth boy whose name I don’t remember. I don’t know the rules of Uno, but apparently there are a couple of different ways you can play, various alternative rules and strategies that everyone must agree on at the begin ing of the game. At that time I thought the boys did not confirm in advance what the rules would be because early on in the game Timmy managed to successfully execute a very rare move, and the thre others told (a) him to take it back.
(D) 

　Nevertheless, Andrew Marks, knowing that what he was witnessing was bullying, pure and simple, put himself between the bully and the victim and took the bullet. When I called his mother that night to tell her what had happened, I think I cried myself. I told Mrs. Marks that Andrew was the kind of student who made me proud to be a teacher and that I had wanted to be just like (e) him when I was growing up.


43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)


44. 밑줄 친 (a) ～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① ‘I’는 네 명의 소년들 중 한 명의 이름을 기억하지 못한다.
② ‘I’는 소년들이 게임 규칙을 미리 정하지 않았다고 생각했다.
③ Travis는 Andrew를 놀린 적이 없다.
④ Timmy는 자신이 낸 카드를 다시 가져왔다.
⑤ ‘I’는 Andrew의 어머니와 통화했다.





제3 교시

2016학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I agree. Your report is excellent.
② You’re right. We need a new computer.
③ Don’t worry. Sometimes rebooting helps.
④ No problem. The technician already fixed it.
⑤ Just a moment. It’s saved on my cell phone.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Well, you should take a nap first.
② Great. I hope you’ll have a safe trip.
③ If you insist, I’ll reschedule the flight.
④ Really? I’d better go outside to get some.
⑤ Oh, I need to look up the time zone difference.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 마라톤  경기로  인한 교통 통제를 안내하려고
② 보행자  보호 시설의  안전 점검을 촉구하려고
③ 교통법규 위반 단속 계획을 공지하려고
④ 공사 구역 진입 시 주의를 당부하려고
⑤ 마라톤 경기 진행 순서를 설명하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 전자책 이용의 이점
② 스마트 교육의 필요성
③ 전자책 기능의 향상 방안
④ 독서와 어휘력 향상의 관계
⑤ 스마트 기기 사용 중독의 심각성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 성우 ? 전시 기획자	② 화가 ? 박물관장
③ 배우 ? 영화 제작자	④ 가수 ? 음향 감독
⑤ 모델 ? 무대 연출가




7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아동 도서 기부하기	② 책에 삽화 그리기
③ 삽화가에게 전화하기	④ 자선 단체 섭외하기
⑤ 인턴십 프로그램 소개하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 걸어서 귀가하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 친구에게 동네를 안내하기 위해서
② 어머니의 심부름을 하기 위해서
③ 운동량을 늘리기 위해서
④ 우체국에 들르기 위해서
⑤ 통학 버스를 놓쳐서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $20	② $28	③ $30	④ $32	⑤ $54

10. 대화를 듣고, Youth Film Festival에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 상영물 종류	② 개최 기간	③ 관람 신청 방법
④ 개최 장소	⑤ 특별 행사

11. Run to Beat Stomach Cancer에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 2년째 열리는 행사이다.
② 모든 수익금이 위암 환자 지원에 사용된다.
③ 연령과 성별로 나누어 우승자에게 상을 준다.
④ 위암 극복 사례자의 연설이 있다.
⑤ 참가비 30달러에 기부금이 포함된다.




2	영어 영역


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 동물원 체험 프로그램을 고르시오.
Stanley Zoo Experience Programs

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Then, let’s take my car to go to your place.
② Don’t worry. I have already fixed the projector.
③ I don’t know which model to choose for camping.
④ Okay. I can save money by not driving every day.
⑤ Yes. It still works well, but I don’t use it any longer.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① This way, we’ll increase our food expenses.
② All right. It’s a good idea to eat more vegetables.
③ Even though it looks good, you must check if it’s gone bad.
④ Right. Now I won’t ignore any food because of its appearance.
⑤ Sure. We should choose food for its nutrients, not its taste.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ms. Scott이 Evan에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ms. Scott:   	
① Wow! That T­shirt looks really good on you.
② One of your friends wants you to call him back.
③ You should wear a jacket so you won’t catch a cold.
④ How about playing sports with friends at the park?
⑤ It’s a good season to play basketball outside.

[16~17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① house building materials for different climates
② how to forecast weather using natural materials
③ differences between traditional and modern houses
④ ways to cope with environmental disasters
⑤ human impact on natural resources
17. 언급된 재료가 아닌 것은?
① wood	② clay	③ snow
④ stone	⑤ wool


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한  것은?



① 단체 숙박 및 할인 가능 여부를 문의하려고
② 저렴하고 깨끗한 호텔 추천을 부탁하려고
③ 결혼식 및 피로연 장소를 예약하려고
④ 청첩장 추가 주문을 취소하려고
⑤ 숙박 일정 변경을 요청하려고






19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Judd stood in front of the elevator, the wave of darkness licking at him like a physical force. He could feel his heart slow and then begin to beat faster. He reached in his pockets for a book of matches. He had left them in the office. Perhaps the lights were working on the floors below. Moving slowly and cautiously, he felt his way toward the door that led to the stairwell. He pushed the door open. The stairwell was in darkness. Carefully holding onto the railing, he started down into the blackness. In the distance below, he saw the wavering beam of a flashlight moving up the stairs. Bigelow, the watchman. “Bigelow!” he yelled. “Bigelow! It’s Dr. Stevens!” His voice bounced against the stone walls, echoing weirdly through the stairwell. The figure holding the flashlight kept climbing silently upward. “Who’s there?” Judd demanded. The only answer was the echo of his words.
① sad and gloomy	② calm and peaceful
③ lively and exciting	④ tense and frightening
⑤ solemn and sacred




영어 영역	3

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　As we all know, even the best­laid plans can go astray. It is therefore important that you keep in mind the possibility of plans going wrong, and maintain flexibility in your plans. If a given strategy or allocation of resources does not succeed, then you must be ready to change to another plan or set other priorities for resource allocation. For example, one of the most damaging strategies in taking a test is that of spending too long on a given problem. Occasionally, you may find that a problem you had thought you could solve in a reasonable amount of time is taking much longer than you had anticipated. Just as you have to know when and how to start a problem, you also have to know when and how to stop. Sometimes the best decision is just to give up and to move on.
① 문제의 난이도에 따른 해결 방법을 익혀야 한다.
② 업무 수행 시 난관에 부딪히더라도 포기하지 말아야  한다.
③ 효율적인 업무 수행을 위해 일의 우선순위를  정해야 한다.
④ 다양한 문제 해결 연습을 통해 사고의 유연성을 키워야 한다.
⑤ 계획의 실패 가능성을 염두에 두고 유연한 태도를 지녀야 한다.







21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Before the Internet, most professional occupations required a large body of knowledge, accumulated over years or even decades of experience. But now anyone with good critical thinking skills and the ability to focus on the important information can retrieve it on demand from the Internet instead of from his own memory. However, those with wandering minds, who might once have been able to focus by isolating themselves with their work, now often find they must do their work with the Internet, which simultaneously furnishes a wide range of unrelated information about their friends’ doings, celebrity news, and millions of other sources of distraction. How well an employee can focus might now be more important than how knowledgeable he is. Knowledge was once an internal property, and focus on the task at hand could be imposed externally; with the Internet, knowledge can be supplied externally but focus must be achieved internally.
① 반복 학습이 지식의 내재화에 효과적이다.
② 정보화 사회에서 정보검색 능력보다 분석 능력이 요구된다.
③ 업무 집중도 향상을 위해 직장 내 독립된 공간이 필요하다.
④ 인터넷에서 얻은 지식보다 경험으로 얻은 지식이 더 유용하다.
⑤ 인터넷 시대에 많은 지식의 보유보다 일에 대한 집중력이 중요하다.
22. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Customers often focus on product specifications, giving interviewers detailed instructions on particular design characteristics: size, weight, color, shape, look, or feel. Razor users may request “a wider handle” or “a lighter weight” or “a shiny look.” By accepting this input from customers, companies assume that the customer knows the best solution
? which is often not the case. A wider handle, for example, may have been requested to prevent the razor from slipping out of the user’s hand while shaving. Although a wider handle may be helpful in solving the problem, a better option might be a regular­size handle with a ribbed, rubberized grip. Although this type of feedback may be appropriate in certain situations, accepting specifications as customer inputs inherently prevents engineers and designers from using their creative skills to devise breakthrough products and services.
① a problem of accepting customer input on specifications
② ways to obtain information for purchasing products
③ the importance of increasing customer satisfaction
④ the necessity of surveying customer preferences
⑤ reasons to improve product specifications





23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Something extraordinary from a cognitive perspective happens when a group starts to sing together. On your own, you might get stuck after the first line of the song. Singing with a single friend, your companion might remember the first word of the second line and that keeps you going for another few words, but then neither of you can remember the third line just now. In a large group, no one has to be able to recollect the entire song. Just one person singing the first syllable of a word can trigger a recollection in another group member to bring the second syllable of that same word, which in turn can cue a group of people to that whole word and the next three words after it. Imagine this notion propagated through a large group of dozens or hundreds of people, and throughout every syllable of the song ― a sort of group consciousness emerges in which no single member of the group can be said to know the song, but the group itself does.	* propagate: 전파하다

① Group Singing: A Secret Bridge to Solving Conflicts
② Magic of Singing Together: Recollecting Lyrics
③ How Melody Triggers Our Hidden Memories
④ Why Not Shape Your Life like a Song?
⑤ Which Comes First, Lyrics or Melody?




4	영어 영역


24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The graph above shows the change of biofuel production capacity and biofuel production in Austria from 2005 to 2010. ① The production capacity of biodiesel increased overall from 2005 to 2009, and remained the same in 2010 as in the previous year. ② From 2007 to 2008, the production of biodiesel decreased in contrast to the rise of that of bioethanol. ③ In 2007, bioethanol production began to appear on the graph, and it continued to increase through 2010. ④ The production capacity of both biodiesel and bioethanol increased from 2008 to 2009. ⑤ In 2010, biodiesel production capacity was more than three times greater than bioethanol production capacity.

25. 2016 High School Musical Theater Workshop에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 한 달 동안 진행된다.
② 등록비 이외에 별도의 숙식비를 납부해야 한다.
③ 지원서가 선착순으로 검토된다.
④ 참가자는 주말마다 브로드웨이 뮤지컬을 관람해야 한다.
⑤ 기숙사는 캠퍼스의 서쪽 끝에 위치해 있다.
26. 
SAVE THE FROGS! Art Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


① 여덟 번째 개최되는 대회이다.
② 수상자는 상금과 자신의 작품이 인쇄된 티셔츠를 받는다.
③ 참가 연령에 제한이 없다.
④ 작품 제출 마감 기한은 10월 31일이다.
⑤ 참가 신청서는 전자 우편으로 보내야 한다.


27. Robert Hooke에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Robert Hooke was born on July 18, 1635 on the Isle of Wight, England. He entered Westminster School at the age of thirteen, and from there went to Oxford, where some of the best scientists in England were working at the time. Hooke		impressed	them		with	his		skills	at		designing experiments and building equipment, and soon became an assistant to the chemist Robert Boyle. Hooke worked with Boyle	for		seven		years.			Hooke		devised	a	compound microscope with a new, screw­operated focusing mechanism he designed. In 1665 Hooke wrote Micrographia, a book describing	observations	made		with		microscopes	and telescopes, which was a big bestseller at that time. He was the  one  who  first			used  the  term  “cell”  for	describing
biological organisms. He died in London on March 3, 1703.
① 13세에 Westminster School에 입학했다.
② 화학자 Robert Boyle의 조수가 되었다.
③ 복합 현미경을 고안했다.
④ 저술한 Micrographia가 당시에 많이 팔리지 않았다.
⑤ ‘세포’라는 용어를 처음으로 사용했다.




영어 영역	5

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
　Humans usually experience sound as the result of vibrations in air or water. Although sound that humans can sense ① is usually carried through these media, vibrations can also travel through soil, including rocks. Thus, sound can travel through a variety of substances with different densities, and the physical characteristics of the medium through which the sound travels have a major influence on
② how the sound can be used. For instance, it requires more energy to make water vibrate than to vibrate air, and it requires a great deal of energy to make soil vibrate. Thus, the use of vibrations in communication ③ depending on the ability of the sender to make a substance vibrate. Because of this, large animals such as elephants are more likely than small animals ④ to use vibrations in the soil for communication. In addition, the speed ⑤ at which sound travels depends on the density of the medium which it is traveling through.









29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The theory of E­prime argues that if you wrote and spoke English without the verb to be, you’d describe events more accurately. For example, when you say, “Johnny is a failure,” the verb is implies that “failure” is in Johnny rather than in your observation of Johnny. The verb to be (in forms such as is, are, and am) also implies (A) permanence / variation ; the implication is that because failure is in Johnny, it will always be there; Johnny will always be a failure. A more
30. 
밑줄 친 his[he]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? There was a knock on the door. “Come in!” said Jack. The man	who	entered	was	young,	well­groomed,	and	trimly dressed, with something of refinement and delicacy in ① his bearing. The streaming umbrella, which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which ② he had come. He looked around anxiously in the glare of the lamp. Jack could see that his face was pale and ③ his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great anxiety. “I owe you an apology. I fear that I have brought some traces of storm and rain into your room,” the man said, raising his golden glasses to ④ his eyes. Jack took the man’s coat and umbrella. “Your coat may
rest here on the hook and will be dry shortly,” ⑤ he said.

[31~34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. If you increase people’s awareness of time ? by placing a big clock in front of them ? they do more stuff. Think about how much work you get done on the day before vacation. It makes sense that by getting more done, we’d feel more in control. More than that, it’s one of the great fantasies of time management: If you get more organized, you will get on top. However, that works only in a finite world. We haven’t lived in that world for quite a while. In our infinite world, we will never be able to get on top of everything. When we complete more tasks, more take their place ? send more e­mails, get more replies. If we do more as a result of better managing our time, we just become 	.  [3점]


* finite: 유한한, 제한된
① safer
② wiser
③ busier
④ greedier
⑤ happier


32. With the invention of typography, spacing and punctuation solidified from gap and gesture to physical artifact. Punctuation marks, which were used differently from one scribe to another in the manuscript era, became part of the standardized, rule­bound system of the printed page.  The
communications scholar Walter Ong has shown how printing

(B)

statement might be “Johnny failed

converted the word into a visual object precisely located in

his last two math exams.” Consider this theory as applied to
your thinking about yourself. When you say, for example, “I’m not good at public speaking” or “I’m unpopular” or “I’m lazy,” you imply that these qualities are in you.  But  these  are simply (C) evaluations / solutions that may  be incorrect or, if at least partly accurate, may change over time.
(A) (B)	(C)
① permanence  ……  erroneous  …… evaluations
②  permanence   ……  precise     …… evaluations
③  permanence   ……  precise     …… solutions
④  variation      ……  erroneous   …… solutions
⑤  variation       ……   precise      …… solutions

space: “Alphabet letterpress printing, in which each letter was cast on a separate piece of metal, or type, marked a psychological breakthrough of the first order.... Writing moves words from the sound world to the world of visual space, but print 	.” Typography made text into a thing, a material object with known dimensions and fixed locations. [3점] * scribe: 필기사
① moves words away from their association with sound
② offers unrestricted dimension to this space
③ locks words into position in this space
④ enhances the inherent concept of words
⑤ confines words to limited meanings




6	영어 영역


33. Adolescents, adults, and old people all report that their worst experiences have taken place in solitude. Almost every activity is more enjoyable with another person around. People are more happy, alert, and cheerful if there are others present, compared to how they feel alone, whether they are working on an assembly line or watching television. But the most depressing condition is not that of working or watching TV alone; the worst moods are reported when
 	. For people in our studies who live by themselves, Sunday mornings are the lowest part of the week, because with no demands on attention, they are unable to decide what to do. The rest of the week psychic energy is directed by external routines. But what is one to do Sunday morning after breakfast, after having browsed through the papers? For many, the lack of structure of those hours is devastating. [3점]
① one’s mind is driven by work on demand
② one is tired of repeated routines at work
③ one’s mind is unable to keep away negative thoughts
④ one is alone and there is nothing that needs to be done
⑤ one has many acquaintances but doesn’t have true friends






34. As essayist Nassim Taleb resolved to do something about the stubborn extra pounds he’d been carrying, he considered taking up various sports. However, joggers seemed skinny and unhappy, and tennis players? Oh, so upper­middle­class! Swimmers, though, appealed to him with their well­built, streamlined bodies. He decided to sign up at his local swimming pool. A short while later, he realized that he had been caught by an illusion. Professional swimmers don’t have perfect bodies because they train extensively. Rather, they are good swimmers because of their physiques. Similarly, female models advertise cosmetics and thus, many female consumers believe that these products make them beautiful. But it is not the cosmetics that make these women model­like. Quite simply, the models are born attractive, and only for this reason are they candidates for cosmetics advertising. As with the swimmers’ bodies, beauty is
 	. Taleb calls the confusions like the cases above the swimmer’s body illusion. [3점]
① what triggers gender stereotypes
② a quality with no absolute standard
③ a factor for selection and not the result
④ what helps people boost their self­esteem
⑤ the product of constant care and investment

[35~36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. 


(A) Our computer salesperson might have a client who says, “I need more control over our order system.” He then builds on that response by asking a question using the most important words in the answer ― control and order system.
(B) They are much more powerful than closed questions that require a simple answer such as “yes” or “no” or a specific piece of information. After the broad question opens the conversation and begins to build rapport, the artful questioner builds on the responses and increases his understanding of the information being transferred.
(C) For instance, he might ask, “What aspects of your order system would you like to have more control over?” or “Could you tell me more about your order system?” When the client responds, he builds his next question around the response to that question, and so on.

① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

36. 

(A) So he has to be aggressive: he has to make it clear, through his words and deeds, that he is not weak. He has to be willing to fight in response to even the slightest challenge to his reputation ― and that’s what a “culture of honor” means.
(B) If you live on some rocky mountainside, you can’t farm. You probably raise goats or sheep, and the kind of culture that grows up around being a herdsman is very different from the culture that grows up around growing crops. The survival of a farmer relies on the cooperation of others in the community.
(C) But a herdsman is off by himself. Farmers also don’t have to worry that their livelihood will be stolen in the night, because crops can’t easily be stolen. But a herdsman does have to worry. He’s under constant threat of ruin through the loss of his animals.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역	7

[37~38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37. 


　Clouds are formed when moist air is carried upward by warm air currents rising from the earth’s surface during the day. ( ① ) When this air reaches high altitudes where the temperature and air pressure are lower than at the earth’s surface, the moisture comes out of the rising air and forms the water droplets we see as clouds. ( ② ) Thus, during the daytime, clouds are continually being formed and then evaporated. ( ③ ) At night, when the surface of the earth cools, the cloud­producing process cuts off. ( ④ ) The existing clouds continue to evaporate, but they are not replaced by new ones. ( ⑤ ) The result: cloudless skies in the morning.












38. 
39. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Once you have made a decision, you have to be able to live with it. Sometimes we make bad decisions that are irreversible. ① If you make a commitment in a negotiation, you have to uphold it, even if you know it was a bad decision on your part. ② You can always go back and ask to renegotiate a deal or issue, but you have to maintain your commitment if renegotiation is not possible or is unsuccessful.
③ If you break a commitment made in a negotiation, you can be sure that you will not get the opportunity to negotiate with that particular party again. ④ Acquiring the information you need to have a successful negotiation is a critical component of your overall effort. ⑤ Sometimes it is painful to fulfill a commitment, but it is more painful and can be fatal to lose business because you failed to fulfill a commitment.



40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]





　If you’re frustrated by the market and you’re looking for a currency that can stand the test of time, look no further. In the Caroline Islands in the South Pacific, there’s an island named Yap (or Uap). ( ① ) In 1903 an American anthropologist named Henry Furness III visited the islanders and found they had an unusual system of currency. ( ② ) It consisted of carved stone wheels called fei, ranging in diameter from a foot to 12 feet. ( ③ ) Because the stones were heavy, the islanders didn’t normally carry their money around with them. ( ④ ) After a transaction the fei might remain on a previous owner’s land, but it was understood who owned what. ( ⑤ ) But that stone was still used as currency, even though it was unseen and irretrievable beneath hundreds of feet of water.




       (A) in one’s memories of personal circumstances at the time one heard about national tragedies does not guarantee their (B) .

(A) (B)
① Confidence	……	uniqueness
② Confidence	……	accuracy
③  Vividness	……	symbolism
④ Distortion	……	usefulness
⑤ Distortion	……	meaningfulness




8	영어 영역


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 



(C) 






41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why We Still Keep Physical Files
② Digital Culture: Understanding New Media
③ Create Unlimited Space for Your Memories
④ Digital Tools Are a Communication Wizard!
⑤ Challenges of Early Adopters in the Digital Age
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① represents the digital signals
② carries a clue to the message
③ offers user­friendly environments
④ makes information accessible to all
⑤ suppresses your memory from the past


[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(D)
　In her hand, she held a tendril of ivy. “This fell out of your bouquet when you were on the dance floor,” she said. Carol thanked her and began to reach for it, when the woman added, “Do you mind if I keep it?” Carol was startled at first. She hadn’t even tossed her bouquet yet. And she barely knew this woman. She wondered, “What did she want with my ivy?” But then practicality kicked in.
(e) She was leaving on her honeymoon in the morning and certainly wouldn’t take the bouquet along. She had no plans for preserving it.	* tendril: (식물의) 덩굴손

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Carol에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 결혼식 부케에 사용할 꽃을 직접 골랐다.
② 결혼식 피로연에서 시어머니의 친구를 만났다.
③ 시어머니의 친구로부터 화분을 결혼 선물로 받았다.
④ 결혼식 피로연에서 춤을 추었다.
⑤ 결혼식 부케를 간직할 계획이었다.




2017학년도	3월	고3 전국연합학력평가	문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think reading newspapers is boring.
② No, they deliver the paper around 6 a.m.
③ Well, I’d prefer to read the news on paper.
④ I heard the printing ink is very harmful, though.
⑤ You owe me $100 for two months’ subscription.



2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s reasonable. I’ll take those glasses.
② Sure. You may go during the lunch break.
③ All right. You can play soccer after school.
④ It’s your fault. You need to pay the repair bill.
⑤ That’s too bad. You should have worked harder.


3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고 르시오.
① 도서관 후원 단체의 회원을 모집하려고
② 도서관 확장 공사의 일정을 공지하려고
③ 도서관의  헌책 나눔 행사를  홍보하려고
④ 도서관에  대한 정부 지원을  촉구하려고
⑤ 도서관의 평생 교육 프로그램을 안내하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 예습과 복습을 꾸준히 해야 한다.
② 지킬 수 있는 학습 계획을 세워야 한다.
③ 남을 가르치면서 더 많은 것을 배울 수 있다.
④ 풀이 과정을 적는 것이 수학 공부에 효율적이다.
⑤ 사실의 단순 암기보다 개념의 이해에 충실해야 한다.


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건물 관리인 ? 건물주
② 부동산 중개인 ? 세입자
③ 이사 업체 직원 ? 집주인
④ 가전제품 수리 기사 ? 고객
⑤ 배달 업체 직원 ? 꽃집 주인
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 휴대 전화 방수 케이스 사기
② 여행 사진 인화 신청하기
③ 빌려준  텐트 찾아오기
④ 캠프장  위치 확인하기
⑤ 래프팅 예약하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 제주도 여행을 취소한 이유를 고르시오.
① 사촌과  함께 보낼 일정이  생겨서
② 계절 학기 수업을  수강해야  해서
③ 가족과 말레이시아에 가야 해서
④ 시간제  일자리를  구해야 해서
⑤ 콘서트  연습과  시간이 겹쳐서

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $6	② $8	③ $10	④ $12	⑤ $14


10. 대화를 듣고, Kite Flying Competition에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜	② 장소	③ 참가비
④ 심사 기준	⑤ 상품


1 . Spring Walking Day에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 학부모도 참가할 수 있다.
② 3월 마지막 토요일에 개최된다.
③ 교문에서 출발하여 5 km를 걷는다.
④ 점심과 물이 무료로 제공된다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 참가 등록이 가능하다.




2 영어 영역

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 애완동물 운반  용 가방을 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Pet Carriers

①
②
③
④
⑤


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Wonderful choice! You won’t regret.
② Okay. The shipping is $3 per address.
③ Don’t worry. We’ll keep them for you.
④ I’m sorry. The last pair has just been sold.
⑤ Never mind. Let me call the store right away.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① You’re right. Then I should email the cards.
② I understand. I should make the cards myself.
③ Yeah. This would be a great birthday present.
④ Then, please drive them home after the party.
⑤ Not at all. I’ve already invited all my classmates.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Carla가 노신사에게 할 말로 가장 적 절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Carla:  	
① Do you have any specific model in mind?
② Then, could you tell me your budget range?
③ Everyone has a different taste, so I can’t tell.
④ If you get her these earphones, she’d be happy.
⑤ Headphones would be better for listening to music.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① selecting good vegetable seeds
② growing vegetables and fruits in pots
③ managing indoor humidity using plants
④ using sand to store vegetables and fruits
⑤ mixing sand and soil for a vegetable garden

17. 언급된 채소나 과일이 아닌 것은?
① carrots	② onions	③ potatoes ④ apples	⑤ pears





① 경품 당첨 소식을 알리려고
② 예약  취소  불가를 통지하려고
③ 시설  훼손  비용을 청구하려고
④ 설문  조사  참여를 요청하려고
⑤ 숙박  시설  개장을 홍보하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Before I could get off my horse, I heard a disturbing sound. Charlie heard it, too. He stopped abruptly and backed quickly away from the sound. The rattling sound seemed to echo down the river. As I turned my head, I caught a glimpse of a brown and gray curled creature. The rattlesnake was in position to strike. Fear gripped my heart and it pounded furiously. My hands began to sweat and my legs were trembling. I knew any slight movement might make the deadly snake strike. I had only one choice: to get Charlie out of danger. He had the same idea. He spun quickly, avoiding the rattlesnake’s attack. As we reached a safe distance, my heart rate began to slow to its regular rhythm. I patted Charlie’s head and said, “Good boy. You saved my life.”
① frightened → relieved	② cheerful → upset
③ curious → disappointed	④ bored → excited
⑤ ashamed → grateful

20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Anyone who has tried to complete a jigsaw puzzle as the clock ticked on toward a deadline knows that the more they struggle to find the missing pieces, the harder it is to find them. As soon as the clock stops, on the other hand, the pieces virtually find each other. Why do the answers we missed in an exam so often occur to us as soon as we turn in the test? The answer, surely, is that we are trying too hard. We are trying in an anxious or frustrated way, and not surprisingly, this makes us tense up. This kind of trying results from doubt. If we didn’t doubt our ability to perform the task at hand, we wouldn’t need to try. You don’t “try” to sit down and pick up the newspaper when you get home from work, do you?
① 스트레스 유발 요인은 사람마다 다양하다.
② 적당한 긴장감은 집중력과 수행 속도를 향상한다.
③ 과도한 경쟁의식은 성급한 상황 판단을 부추긴다.
④ 적절한 휴식은 암기력을 향상하는 데 도움이 된다.
⑤ 자기 능력을 의심하면 과도하게 애쓰다가 일을 그르친다.






21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

영어 영역	3
                 23. Chalk and blackboards first made their mark in higher

　Deposits of oil lie under the frozen ground, or tundra, of Alaska. Scientists and engineers have the technology needed to get this oil out of the ground and move it across the state through pipelines. Some people support drilling for Alaska’s oil and moving it over the land in pipes. Other people fear that digging into the tundra will be harmful to the environment. They also fear that above­ground pipelines and spilled oil may harm the plants and animals in the region. People who are opposed to drilling in Alaska don’t want to take the benefits of having more oil with the potential bad effects on the environment. Other people feel that this tradeoff is worth the benefits it will give to the community, or to the country as a whole. Still others say new technology should be developed to reduce the dangers to the environment before drilling is allowed.
① growing concerns of shrinking tundra
② geographical features of Alaskan tundra
③ conflicting views on drilling for Alaska’s oil
④ negative effects of oil spill on the environment
⑤ necessity of developing a new drilling technology








[22 ~ 23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
2 . It has been estimated that every $1.00 spent on locally produced foods returns (or circulates) $3.00 to $7.00 within the community. Consumers buy produce and other goods from local farmers, who buy farm supplies from local businesses. Those businesses help to keep people in the community employed, and, in turn, they spend their money back in the community. This helps to encourage a thriving community and increases the economic health of the region. In addition, when farmers have direct access to consumers, they are able to keep more of each dollar earned from a sale, because the middle­man is eliminated. This increases profits to producers and keeps their farms competitive with the traditional retail chain stores. Purchasing local produce not only improves the local economy, but it can also help you stretch your food dollar and get high­quality fruits and vegetables.
① Buy Locally, Create a Positive Chain Effect
② Are Locally Produced Foods High in Quality?
③ Purchase Fresh Foods, Make the World Green
④ The Local Farmer as a New Community Leader
⑤ Who Benefits from the Traditional Retail Chain?

education at elite military schools at the start of the 19th
century. Decades of war and geopolitical turmoil, combined with sweeping changes to the scale and social organization of governments, put a new premium on training large groups of elite civil and military engineers. Mathematics was their essential tool, and would also become a gateway subject for efficiently sorting the best and brightest. Blackboards offered instructors a way of working quickly and visibly in front of the large groups of elite students who would now need to know mathematics to a greater degree than ever before. They also provided a setting for discipline, allowing those instructors to examine and correct the work of many students at once or in succession as they solved problems at the board.
* turmoil: 혼란
① The Advancement of Elite Education Institutes
② Math Instructors: Mentors for Future Engineers
③ Mathematics: A Key Factor of Military Campaigns
④ Military Schools’ Roles in the Progress of Science
⑤ Blackboard: A Setting of Math Education for Elites







24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The two pie charts above show the percentages of foreign­trained doctors who were working in the U.S. in 2013 and in the UK in 2014 by countries of origin. ① Doctors who were trained in India represented the largest part both in the
U.S. and in the UK. ② In the U.S., the percentage of doctors from the Caribbean islands and the EU countries took up more than one­tenth, respectively. ③ Doctors who were trained in Africa accounted for a greater percentage in the UK than in the U.S. ④ The percentage of Pakistan­trained doctors in the UK was more than double that in the U.S. ⑤ In the U.S., the percentage of doctors from the EU countries was lower than that of the doctors from Canada and Mexico combined.



4	영어 영역

25. A. Manette Ansay에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Award­winning author A. Manette Ansay was born in Michigan in 1964, and grew up in Wisconsin. She was talented at playing the piano when young and subsequently trained as a concert pianist, attending the Peabody Conservatory of Music. However, by the age of 21 she had to give up the pursuit because of ill health, and by 23 she began writing in need of another outlet for her creative energies. Since then, she has become a best­selling novelist. After her time at Peabody, she worked for a while at the American Museum of Natural History before returning to school at the University of Maine to study anthropology. Since the 1990s, her health has gradually stabilized, though there are still times when even writing is challenging. Ansay went on to study and work at Cornell University, and then became an assistant professor at Vanderbilt University.
① 어린 시절에 피아노 연주에 재능이 있었다.
② 23세 무렵에 글을 쓰기 시작했다.
③ 미국 자연사 박물관에서 근무한 적이 있다.
④ 1990년대 이후 건강을 완전히 회복했다.
⑤ Vanderbilt 대학교의 조교수가 되었다.



26. King Clay Pottery Classes에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하는 것은?

① 동일한 수준의 수강생으로 반이 구성된다.
② 반은 최소 10명으로 구성된다.
③ 수요일에는 오후 7시부터 수업이 진행된다.
④ 토요일에도 강습을 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 수강료에 모든 재료비가 포함되어 있다.
27. 
Creatures of the Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하 지 않는 것은?

① 오후 5시부터 오후 10시까지 진행된다.
② 박쥐 생태학자를 만날 수 있다.
③ 안내원이 동행하는 야간 하이킹이 있다.
④ OFP 회원은 참가비가 무료다.
⑤ 먹거리 트럭에서 음식을 구입할 수 있다.



28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　One of the simplest and most effective ways to build empathy in children ① is to let them play more on their own. Unsupervised kids are not reluctant to tell one another how they feel. In addition, children at play often take on other roles, pretending to be Principal Walsh or Josh’s mom, happily forcing ② themselves to imagine how someone else thinks and feels. Unfortunately, free play is becoming rare. Boston College research professor Peter Gray has documented a continuous and ③ ultimately dramatic decline in children’s opportunities to play and explore in their own chosen ways over the past fifty years in the United States and other developed countries. The effects have been especially ④ damaged, he argues, to empathy. He concludes that a decline of empathy and a rise in narcissism are exactly ⑤ what we would expect to see in children who have little opportunity to play socially.
* empathy: 공감, 감정 이입



영어 영역	5

29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적 절한 것은? [3점]
　Until	the	twentieth	century,	when	composers	began experimenting freely with form and design, classical music continued to follow basic rules relating to structure, not to mention harmony. There still was room for (A) conformity / individuality ― the great composers didn’t follow the rules, but made the rules follow them ― yet there was always a fundamental proportion and logic behind the design. Even after many of the rules were (B) maintained / overturned by radical concepts in more recent times, composers, more often than not, still organized their thoughts in ways that produced an overall, unifying structure. That’s one reason the atonal, incredibly complex works by Arnold Scho?nberg or Karlheinz	Stockhausen,		to	name		two		twentieth­century Modernists, are nonetheless (C) approachable / inaccessible . The sounds might be very strange, but the results are still decidedly classical in terms of organization.
* atonal: 무조의, 장조나 단조 등의 조를 따르지 않는
(A) (B)	(C)
① conformity	······	maintained ······ approachable
② individuality  ······	overturned  ······  approachable
③ individuality  ······	maintained ······ approachable
④ individuality  ······	maintained  ······ inaccessible
⑤ conformity	······	overturned  ······ inaccessible









30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Mrs. Smith, an intelligent woman in her sixties, has suffered a massive stroke, affecting the back portions of her right cerebral hemisphere. She has perfectly preserved intelligence ― and humor. ① She sometimes complains to her nurse that she has not put dessert or coffee on her tray. When the nurse says, “But, it is right there, on the left,” Mrs. Smith does not seem to understand what ② she says, and does not look to the left. If the nurse gently turns Mrs. Smith’s head, so that the dessert comes into sight, in the preserved right half of ③ her visual field, she says, “Oh, there it is ― it wasn’t there before.” Actually, ④ she has totally lost the idea of “left.” Sometimes, she complains that her portions are too small, but this is because she only eats from the right half of the plate ― it does not occur to ⑤ her that it has a left half as well.
* cerebral hemisphere: 대뇌 반구

[31 ~ 34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Recent research by Juliet Zhu and J. J. Argo suggests that making subtle changes to the seating arrangements in meetings can have an effect on what people choose to focus their attention on. For example, the study found that circular seating arrangements typically activated people’s need to belong. As a result, they were more likely to focus on the group’s collective objectives and be persuaded by messages and proposals that highlighted group benefits rather than benefits to any one individual. This effect was reversed, however, when the seating arrangement was either angular (think L­shaped) or square. These seating arrangements tended  to activate people’s need for 	. As a result, people were more responsive and reacted more favorably to messages and proposals that were self­oriented and that allowed them to elevate their individualism.
① uniqueness	② safety	③ certainty
④ harmony	⑤ fairness










32. Much of the communication among chimps, as for animals in general, is 	. One prime example involved six young chimpanzees being studied in the 1970s at the Delta Primate Research Center. One of them (we’ll call  him the  “leader”)  was  introduced  alone  into  an  enclosure and shown either a hidden source of food or a stuffed snake. When this chimp was reunited with his fellows outside the enclosure, they quickly resumed their normal activities. There was no readily apparent sign that the leader communicated his important knowledge to the other chimps. Yet, when all six were allowed into the enclosure after the leader had been shown food, the group headed straight for the food. In the “snake” condition, the chimps all entered the enclosure with the fur on their backs spiking up and approached the danger zone with extreme caution, poking at the leaf bed with sticks rather than with their hands. Either the leader chimp had conveyed the information to the others, or they were superbly attuned to his intentions. [3점]
* enclosure: 울타리로 둘러싸인 구역
① affected by their habitat
② too subtle for us to notice
③  rarely relationship­oriented
④ readily open to other species
⑤ surprisingly inferior to that of ours



6	영어 영역

3 . Science and technology degrees are rewarding because they are not designed 	. If you are taking a highly specialized or vocational degree, you may well know what career you are aiming for even before you get to university, but for most science and technology undergraduates university is an adventure in itself; ideas about a career may be in your thoughts, but not completely fixed. This gives you the advantage of knowing that you can develop your career ideas as your course progresses, aware that your degree will be of help to you in many areas of work. It is perhaps with this in mind that science and technology degree programs tend to be wide in scope and flexible in approach. You might go to university to study chemistry and find yourself doing some work within the physics department. [3점]
① to represent a socially privileged status
② necessarily to be obtained in the university
③ to force you to follow the established scholars
④ only to grade you and make you feel frustrated
⑤ exclusively to get you into a job and keep you there











34. It’s a common practice during creativity seminars to give participants a bag full of materials and then a problem to solve. The materials are usually everyday items. Their use is obvious to all. You are then to use those materials in whatever ways you want to solve the problem; however, there isn’t usually an obvious connection between the items and your problem. For instance, maybe you have to figure out how to create a communication device using a hammer, tape, a hairbrush, and a bag of marbles. Most people have a cognitive bias called functional fixedness that causes them to see objects only in their normal context. The use of the materials in their ordinary way will generally lead to no workable solutions. The really exciting solutions come from overcoming functional fixedness and using these everyday items in new ways. To see the possibilities it is helpful to take the viewpoint that 	. [3점]
① good tools make fine work
② nothing is what you think it is
③ having many options is not a blessing
④ the more we know, the more we want
⑤ deep learning is composed of small parts
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Parents play a huge role in every aspect of their children’s life, even in the athletic aspect. ① It is a good thing for parents to encourage and support their children in sports which interest them, and this involves forming a good relationship with the children’s coach. ② Parents and coaches then should help hand in hand to foster a positive athletic atmosphere for players. ③ Coaches then should exert extra effort in getting to know the parents of their players, and by so doing, determine ways by which parents are willing to help their children and the team in general. ④ Competitive sports should be avoided for children because they are more likely to cause injuries. ⑤ When parents and coaches have a dialogue, they also learn more about each other’s expectations and this leads to a better relationship between them as well.







[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

(A) The provision of national defense services is one strong example of a good that is freely available to all and not rationed by prices. In other cases, criteria such as income, age, residence, or the payment of certain taxes or charges are used to determine eligibility to receive benefits.
(B) This means that government goods and services are not made available to persons according to their willingness to pay and their use is not rationed by prices. In some cases, the services are available to all, with no direct charge and no eligibility requirements.
(C) For example, to receive Social Security pensions in the United States, individuals must be of a certain age, have worked for a certain period of time (about 10 years) while covered by Social Security, and must have paid their share of Social Security taxes during that time.
[3점]
* rationing: 배분 ** eligibility: 자격
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)



영어 영역	7
37.	39.



(A) So a thermometer in the Sun does not measure the air temperature. On the other hand, the temperature of the air in the shade is usually the same as that in the Sun. So if you really want to know the temperature of the sunlit air, measure it in the shade.
(B) However, if you put a thermometer in direct sunlight, the red­colored alcohol absorbs more sunlight than does the transparent air. That makes the thermometer hotter than the air. Of course, heat will flow from the thermometer into the air, but if the Sun keeps shining on the thermometer, the thermometer will always be hotter.
(C) It turns out that there is a good reason. Thermometers are supposed to measure air temperature. When you place them in a room, they eventually reach the same temperature as the air.



　Infrasound has the special characteristic of traveling well in the ground or water; in fact, the waves of an earthquake can be thought of as a form of infrasound. ( ① ) Because sound travels much faster in ground than in air, ground­borne vibrations, if perceived, can serve as an early warning system, arriving well before airborne sound from the same source arrives. ( ② ) Infrasound dissipates less rapidly in air, making it ideal for long­distance communication. ( ③ ) Perception of infrasound, however, presents some specific problems. ( ④ ) Thus, infrasonic receivers need to be large and tend to be found on the large animals able to generate infrasound. ( ⑤ ) This is probably the reason that infrasonic communication is used by only a few animals, and the best understood infrasonic communication system is the African elephants’.
* infrasound: 초저주파음 ** dissipate: 소멸하다

* meteorologist: 기상학자
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
40. 
다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A),
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　The movie industry is obviously affected by personal recommendations. Even though well over a billion dollars is spent every year on promoting new movies, people talking to people is what really counts. ( ① ) According to Marvin Antonowsky, head of marketing for Universal Pictures, “Word of mouth is like wildfire.” ( ② ) This point is well illustrated by the number of low­budget movies that have succeeded with little or no advertising ― and by the number of big­budget flops. ( ③ ) Like the movies, book publishing is another industry where lots of money is traditionally spent on advertising but can’t begin to compete with the power of friends telling friends about their discoveries. ( ④ ) Then a few people read it, told their friends, and started a chain reaction that is still going on. ( ⑤ ) Today, there are well over two million copies in print.
* flop: 실패작





$
The (A) of medical information will be greatly  improved, which will give more  power  to (B) than ever before.

(A) (B)
① availability	······	patients
② availability	······	doctors
③ credibility	······	researchers
④ credibility	······	patients
⑤ productivity  ······	doctors



8	영어 영역

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)








(C)








(D)







41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① How Recycling Can Save the Economy
② Green Attitude: A Key to Sustainable Living
③ Why Evaluation Processes Must Be Objective
④ Paper and Steel: The Most Important Resources
⑤ Recycling Effort May Lead to an Unwanted Result

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① presence	② diversity	③ shortage
④ expense	⑤ standardization

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)







43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4 . 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Amy는 병에 걸린 어머니와 함께 있으려고 휴가를 냈다.
② 사장이  Amy를 교체하기로  한 결정에  동료들은 안도했다.
③ 어머니의 병세가 악화되어 Amy는 휴가를 연장해야 했다.
④ 사장은 Amy를 대체할 사람을 찾으라고 인사과에 말했다.
⑤ Amy가 돌아오자  사장은 Amy를 자신의 사무실로  불렀다.





2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1

6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not yet. I forgot to send it.
② Of course. You can have it.
③ Sorry. We’re sold out of pictures.
④ Right. You  shouldn’t buy a book.
⑤ No, thanks. I don’t want an album.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll ask him if he’d like to.
② Too bad. He went back yesterday.
③ Exactly. I plan to visit Korea later.
④ No. I want to stay longer if possible.
⑤ Right. We  haven’t been to Germany.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 스마트폰 사용 자제를 당부하려고
② 청취자의 문자 참여를 권유하려고
③ 프로그램 방송 시간 변경을 공지하려고
④ 라디오 앱의 새로운 기능을 소개하려고
⑤ 음원 불법 다운로드의 유해성을 경고하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 운동과 숙면은 밀접한 관계가 있다.
② 시골 생활은 건강한 삶에 도움이 된다.
③ 규칙적인 식습관은 장수의 필수 조건이다.
④ 야외 활동은 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
⑤ 가정의 화목은 가족 간의 대화에서 시작된다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 시민 － 경찰관	② 환자 － 간호사
③ 학생 － 소방관	④ 고객 － 차량 정비사
⑤ 학부모 － 영양사


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 티셔츠 주문하기	② 호텔 예약하기
③ 로고 디자인하기	④ 출장 신청하기
⑤ 항공권 취소하기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 영화를 보고 있는 이유를 고르시오.
① 맡은 배역을 더 잘 이해하고 싶어서
② 훌륭한 영화감독이 되고 싶어서
③ 좋아하는 장르의 작품이어서
④ 주연 배우들을 좋아해서
⑤ 작문 숙제를 해야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36	② $45	③ $54	④ $60	⑤ $63


10. 대화를 듣고, Winter Discovery Camp에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 대상	② 활동 내용	③ 기간
④ 기념품	⑤ 참가비


11. Global Design Conference에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① Chicago에서 매년 개최된다.
② 유명 디자이너들의 강연이 있을 것이다.
③ 100명의 디자이너가 제작한 작품들이 전시될 것이다.
④ 6월 20일에 시작한다.
⑤ 등록비는 환불이 가능하다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 재킷을 고르시오.
Blackhills Hiking Jackets

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① I agree. The place was too crowded.
② Of course. It’s very warm downtown.
③ All right. Let’s go on a bus tour then.
④ Sure. Our last vacation was the best ever.
⑤ Yes. The hotel is within walking distance.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Thanks for understanding. I hope it won’t cause any trouble.
② Certainly. I was deeply touched when you sent the message.
③ Good news. The orchestra is still looking for new members.
④ You’re welcome. I did what I had to do for the orientation.
⑤ That’s  right. I couldn’t have won the election without you.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Julia에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:   	
① We need to check what we did last year.
② Why don’t we cancel the program this year?
③ Let me assign this work to the other  teachers.
④ How about joining the program after  school?
⑤ Let’s ask the students what they prefer to do.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① relationship between music and civilization
② materials used to make musical instruments
③ trends in modern art around the world
④ ways to preserve ancient instruments
⑤ use of music for rest and relaxation

17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① China	② Mongolia	③ Nigeria
④ Australia	⑤ Colombia


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Ms. Diane Edwards,
　I am a teacher working at East End High School. I have read from your notice that the East End Seaport Museum is now offering a special program, the 2017  Bug Lighthouse Experience. The program would be a great opportunity for our students to have fun and experience something new. I estimate that 50 students and teachers from our school would like to participate    in it. Would you please let me know if it is possible to make a group reservation for the program for Saturday, November 18? We don’t want to miss this great opportunity. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Best regards, Joseph Loach
① 단체 관람 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
② 교내 행사에 초청할 강사 추천을 부탁하려고
③ 프로그램 단체 예약이 가능한지를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 체험 학습 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 견학 예정 인원수의 변경을 요청하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The start of the boat tour was far from what I had expected. None of the wildlife I saw was exotic. I could only see dull gray rocks. It was also so hot and humid that  I  could  not enjoy the tour fully. However, as the boat slid into the Bay  Park Canal, all of a sudden my mother shouted, “Look at the mangroves!” A whole new world came into sight. The mangrove forest alongside the canal thrilled me as we entered its cool shade. I was fascinated by the beautiful leaves and        f lowers of the mangroves. But best of all, I was charmed by the native birds, monkeys, and lizards moving among the branches. “What a wonderful adventure!” I exclaimed.
* mangrove: 맹그로브(강가나 늪지에서 자라는 열대 나무)
① ashamed → relaxed	② disappointed → excited
③ delighted → confused	④ pleased	→ lonely
⑤ scared	→ relieved

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　At the 2015 Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit, Ginni Rometty offered this advice: “When did you ever learn the most in your life? What  experience? I  guarantee you’ll tell  me it was a time you felt at risk.” To become a better leader, you have to step out of your comfort zone. You have to challenge the conventional ways of doing things and search for opportunities to innovate. Exercising leadership not only requires you to challenge the organizational status  quo  but also requires you to challenge your internal status quo. You have to challenge yourself. You have to venture beyond the boundaries of your current experience and explore new territory. Those are the places where there are opportunities to improve, innovate, experiment, and  grow.  Growth  is always at the edges, just outside the boundaries of where  you  are right now.
* status quo : 현재 상태
① 지도자는 실현 가능한 목표를 설정해야 한다.
② 지도자는 새로운 제도를 적극적으로 도입해야 한다.
③ 지도자는 조직의 현재 상태를 철저히 분석해야 한다.
④ 지도자는 현재의 자신을 넘어서는 도전을 해야 한다.
⑤ 지도자는 기존의 방식과 새로운 방식을 조화시켜야 한다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One exercise in teamwork I do at a company retreat is to    put the group in a circle. At one particular retreat, there were eight people in the circle, and I slowly handed tennis balls to one person to start throwing around the circle. If N equals the number of people in the circle, then the maximum number of balls you can have in motion is N minus 1. Why? Because it’s almost impossible to throw and catch at the same time. The purpose of the exercise is to demonstrate the importance of an individual’s action. People are much more concerned about catching the ball than throwing it. What this demonstrates is that it’s equally important to the success of the exercise that  the person you’re throwing to catches the ball as that you are able to catch the ball. If you’re less concerned about how you deliver information than with how you receive it, you’ll ultimately fail at delegation. You have to be equally skilled at both.
* delegation : 위임
① 구성원 간의 공통된 목표 의식이 협업의 필수 조건이다.
② 정확한 정보 이해는 신속한 업무 수행을 가능하게 한다.
③ 자유로운 의사소통 문화는 직무 만족도 향상에 기여한다.
④ 여가 활동을 함께하는 것도 협업의 효율성을 증가시킨다.
⑤ 협업에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식에도 능숙할 필요가 있다.





22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Sensory-specific satiety is defined as a decrease in appetite, or the subjective liking for the food that is consumed, with  little change in the hedonics of uneaten food. As a result of sensory-specific satiety, when people consume a variety of foods, they tend to overeat. A greater variety of food leads people to eat more than they would otherwise. So, being full and feeling sated are separate matters. The recovery  of  appetite or the motivation to eat is apparent to anyone  who  has consumed a large meal and is quite full, and does not require additional energy or nutrients to meet their  daily  needs, but decides to consume additional calories after seeing the dessert cart. Small changes in the sensory properties of foods are sufficient to increase food intake. For example, subjects who were presented with different shapes of pasta showed increased hedonic ratings and increased energy consumption relative to subjects eating only a single shape of pasta.
* satiety : 포만(감) ** hedonics : 쾌락 *** sated : 충분히 만족한
① necessity of consuming a varied diet in daily life
② reasons for people’s rejection of unfamiliar foods
③ changes in people’s preference for basic food items
④ impact of food variety on the amount of food people consume
⑤ importance of maintaining food diversity to prevent overeating
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Individual authors and photographers have rights to their intellectual property during their lifetimes, and their  heirs  have rights for 70 years after the creator’s death, so any publication less than 125 years old has to be checked for its copyright status. The duration of copyright protection has increased steadily over the years; the life-plus-70-years standard was set by the Copyright Term Extension Act  of 1998, which increased the 50-year limit established by the 1976 Copyright Act. Supporters of such legislation like to defend these increases with tales of starving writers and their impoverished descendants, but in reality the beneficiaries are more likely to be transnational publishing companies.  And note that copyright laws serve a dual purpose. In addition to protecting the rights of authors so as to encourage the publication of new creative works, copyright is also supposed to place reasonable time limits on those rights  so  that  outdated works may be incorporated into new creative efforts. Therefore, the extended copyright protection frustrates new creative endeavors such as including poetry and song lyrics    on Internet sites.
* heir :  상속인  ** legislation :  법률, 입법
① The Untold Origin of Copyright Protection
② Creativity Leaps with Longer Copyright Protection!
③ More Is Not Enough: No Limits to Copyright Coverage
④ Who Smiles at Copyright Protection, Writers or Publishers?
⑤ Does Extended Copyright Truly Enhance Protection and Creation?

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　The above graph shows the sales of four types of ethical produce in the UK in 2010 and 2015. ① In 2015, the sales of each of the four types of ethical produce showed an increase from the sales of its corresponding type in 2010. ② Among  the four types of ethical produce, the sales of Organic ranked the highest in 2010 but ranked the second highest in 2015.
③ Among the four types of ethical produce, Rainforest Alliance recorded the second highest sales in 2010 and recorded the highest sales in 2015. ④ The sales of Fairtrade   in 2015 were twice as high as those in 2010. ⑤ In both 2010 and 2015, the sales of Vegetarian meat alternatives were the lowest among the four types of ethical produce.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Jim Marshall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? The late photographer Jim Marshall is regarded as one of the most celebrated photographers of the 20th century. He
holds the distinction of being the first and only photographer  to be presented with the Grammy Trustees Award. He started  as a professional photographer in 1959. He was  given unrivaled access to rock’s biggest artists,  including  the Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, and Ray Charles. He was the only photographer granted backstage access for the Beatles’ final full concert and also shot the Rolling Stones on their historic 1972 tour. He formed special bonds with the artists he worked with and those relationships helped him capture some of his most vivid and iconic imagery. Over a 50-year career, the photographs he took appeared on more than 500  album  covers. He was passionate about his work up until the end. “I have no kids,” he used to say. “My photographs are my children.”
① Grammy Trustees Award가 수여된 최초이자 유일한 사진작가이다.
② 1959년에 직업 사진작가로 일하기 시작했다.
③ Rolling Stones의 역사적인 1972년 투어에서 그들을 촬영했다.
④ 함께 작업한 예술가들과 특별한 유대 관계를 맺지 않았다.
⑤ 500개가 넘는 앨범 커버에 그가 촬영한 사진들이 실렸다.

26. 2018 CVL Volleyball Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
27. 
Eugene Community Charity Fun Hike에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?




All donations this year go toward purchasing new books for the children’s library!
?Date: Saturday, December 2, 2017
?Place: Peterson National Park
?Registration & Safety Instruction:  9:00 a.m.－9:30 a.m.
?Start Time: 10:00 a.m.
How to Participate
?Each  participant  should  set  a  goal  for  donation  by choosing only one of the following courses:
－ Course A: 2 miles ($20)
－ Course B: 3 miles ($30)
－ Course C: 5 miles ($50 or more)
?Participants should make their donations before the start.
What to Bring
?Participants	should	bring	comfortable	shoes	and sunscreen.
?Lunch  is  not  provided,  so  please  bring  your  own refreshments.
　Participants who complete their hike will receive a medal. For more information, please call 234-567-1234.



2018 CVL Volleyball Camp
　The College Volleyball League (CVL) is hosting a camp for high school students from January 23 to 27.
Training Program
　After a brief skills test, participants will be trained  based on their levels.
?Basic Level: serving, tossing, and spiking
?Advanced Level: individual plays and team strategies
Daily Schedule
?9 a.m.－11 a.m.: one-on-one skills training
?1 p.m.－4 p.m.: practice game sessions
Note
?Participation fee is $100.
?Participants will receive a volleyball and a camp T-shirt.
?College volleyball players will visit to offer advice to participants on the final day of the camp.
For more information, visit our website at www.CVL.org.

① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 참가자들은 수준에 따라 훈련을 받을 것이다.
③ 오전에 연습 경기를 실시한다.
④ 참가자들은 배구공과 캠프 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.
⑤ 마지막 날에 대학 배구 선수들이 방문할 것이다.

① 올해의 기부금 전액은 어린이 도서관 공사비로 사용된다.
② 안전 교육은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
③ 각 참가자는 두 개의 코스를 선택할 수 있다.
④ 점심 식사가 제공된다.
⑤ 하이킹을 완료한 참가자들은 메달을 받을 것이다.




28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Psychologists who study giving behavior ① have noticed that some people give substantial amounts to one or two charities, while others give small amounts to many charities. Those who donate to one or two charities seek evidence about what the charity is doing and ② what it is really having a positive impact. If the evidence indicates that the charity is really helping others, they make a substantial donation. Those who give small amounts to many charities are not  so  interested in whether what they are ③ doing helps others ─ psychologists call them warm glow givers. Knowing that they are giving makes ④ them feel good, regardless of the impact of their donation. In many cases the donation is so small ─
$10 or less ─ that if they stopped ⑤ to think, they would realize that the cost of processing the donation is likely to exceed any benefit it brings to the charity.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
　Some prominent journalists say that archaeologists should work with treasure hunters because treasure hunters have accumulated valuable historical  artifacts  that  can  reveal much about the past. But archaeologists are not asked to cooperate with tomb robbers, who also have valuable  historical artifacts. The quest for profit and the search for knowledge cannot coexist in archaeology because of the
① time factor. Rather incredibly, one archaeologist employed by a treasure hunting firm said that as long as archaeologists are given six months to study shipwrecked artifacts  before they are sold, no historical knowledge is ② found! On the contrary, archaeologists and assistants from the INA (Institute of Nautical Archaeology) needed more than a decade of year-round conservation before they could even ③ catalog all the finds from an eleventh-century AD wreck they had excavated. Then, to interpret those finds, they had to ④ learn Russian, Bulgarian, and Romanian, without which they would never  have  learned   the   true   nature   of   the   site.   Could  a “commercial archaeologist” have ⑤ waited more than a decade or so before selling the finds?
* prominent : 저명한 ** excavate : 발굴하다








30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Scott Adams, the creator of Dilbert, one of the most successful comic strips of all time, says that two personal letters dramatically changed his life. One night ① he was watching a PBS-TV program about cartooning, when he decided to write to the host of the show, Jack Cassady, to ask for his advice about becoming a cartoonist. Much to ② his surprise, he heard back from Cassady within a few weeks in  the form of a handwritten letter. The letter advised Adams not to be discouraged if he received early rejections. Adams got inspired and submitted some cartoons, but ③ he was quickly rejected. Not following Cassady’s advice, ④ he became discouraged, put his materials away, and decided to forget cartooning as a career. About fifteen months later, he was surprised to receive yet another letter  from  Cassady,  especially since he hadn’t thanked ⑤ him for his original advice. He acted again on Cassady’s encouragement, but this time he stuck with it and obviously hit it big.

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. Apocalypse Now, a film produced and directed by Francis Ford Coppola, gained widespread popularity, and for good reason. The film is an adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel Heart of Darkness, which is set in the African Congo at the  end of the 19th century. Unlike the original novel, Apocalypse Now is set in Vietnam and Cambodia during the Vietnam War. The setting, time period, dialogue and other incidental details are changed but the fundamental narrative and themes of Apocalypse Now are the same as those of Heart of Darkness. Both describe a physical journey, reflecting the central character’s mental and spiritual journey, down a river to confront the deranged Kurtz character, who represents the worst aspects of civilisation. By giving Apocalypse Now a setting that was contemporary at the time of its release, audiences were able to experience and identify  with  its  themes  more  easily  than they would have if the film had been
 	. [3점]
* deranged : 제정신이 아닌
① a literal adaptation of the novel
② a source of inspiration for the novel
③ a faithful depiction of the Vietnam War
④ a vivid dramatisation of a psychological journey
⑤ a critical interpretation of contemporary civilisation






32. How many of the lunches that you ate over the last week  can you recall? Do you remember what you ate today? I hope so. Yesterday? I bet it takes a moment’s effort.  And  what about the day before yesterday? What about a week ago? It’s not so much that your memory of last week’s lunch has disappeared; if provided with the right cue,  like where  you  ate it, or whom you ate it with, you would likely recall what had been on your plate. Rather, it’s difficult to remember last week’s lunch because your brain has  filed it  away  with  all the other lunches you’ve ever eaten as just another lunch. When we try to recall something from  a  category  that includes as many instances as “lunch” or “wine,” many memories compete for our attention. The memory of last Wednesday’s  lunch  isn’t  necessarily  gone;  it’s  that  you lack
 	.  But
a wine that talks: That’s unique. It’s a memory without rivals.
[3점]
① the channel to let it flow into the pool of ordinary memories
② the right hook to pull it out of a sea of lunchtime memories
③ the glue to attach it to just another lunch memory
④ the memory capacity to keep a box of sleeping memories
⑤ the sufficient number of competitors in a battle for attention




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. In the less developed world, the percentage of the population involved in agriculture is declining, but at  the  same time, those remaining in agriculture are not benefiting from technological advances. The typical scenario in the less developed world is one in which a very few commercial agriculturalists are technologically advanced while the vast majority are incapable of competing. Indeed, this vast majority
 	  because of larger global causes. As an example, in Kenya, farmers are actively encouraged to grow export crops such as tea and coffee at the expense of basic food production. The result is that a staple crop, such as maize, is not being produced in a sufficient amount. The essential argument here is that the capitalist mode of production is affecting peasant production  in  the  less  developed  world  in  such  a  way  as  to  limit  the
production of staple foods, thus causing a food problem. [3점]
* staple : 주요한 ** maize : 옥수수 *** peasant : 소농(小農)
① have lost control over their own production
② have turned to technology for food production
③ have challenged the capitalist mode of production
④ have reduced their involvement in growing cash crops
⑤ have regained their competitiveness in the world market






34. Over the past 60 years, as mechanical processes have replicated behaviors and talents we thought were unique to humans, we’ve had  to  change  our minds about what sets us apart. As we invent more species  of  AI,  we  will  be forced to surrender more of what  is  supposedly  unique  about humans. Each step of surrender ─ we are not the only mind that can play chess, f ly a plane, make music, or invent   a mathematical law ─ will be painful and sad. We’ll spend the next three decades ─ indeed, perhaps the next century ─ in a permanent identity crisis, continually asking ourselves what humans are good for. If  we aren’t  unique toolmakers,  or artists, or  moral ethicists, then  what, if  anything, makes  us special? In the grandest irony  of  all,  the greatest benefit of an everyday, utilitarian AI will not be increased productivity or an economics of abundance or a new way of doing science ─ although all those will  happen.  The  greatest  benefit of  the arrival  of  artificial intelligence is that
 	. [3점]
* replicate : 복제하다
① AIs will help define humanity
② humans could also be like AIs
③ humans will be liberated from hard labor
④ AIs could lead us in resolving moral dilemmas
⑤ AIs could compensate for a decline in human intelligence
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　In the context of SNS, media literacy has been argued to     be especially important “in order to  make the  users  aware  of their rights when using SNS tools, and also help them acquire or reinforce human rights values and develop the behaviour necessary to respect other people’s rights and freedoms”. ① With regard to peer-to-peer risks such as bullying, this last element is of particular importance. ② This relates to a basic principle  that  children  are  taught  in  the  off line world as well: ‘do not do to others what you would   not want others to do to you’. ③ Children’s SNS activities should be encouraged when we help them accumulate knowledge. ④ This should also be a golden rule with regard  to SNS, but for children and young people it is much more difficult to estimate the consequences and potential serious impact of their actions in this environment. ⑤ Hence, raising awareness of children from a very early age about the particular characteristics of SNS and the potential long-term impact of a seemingly trivial act is crucial.


[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) For example, the Columbia Journalism Review is marketed toward professional journalists and its few advertisements are news organizations, book publishers, and others. A few magazines, like Consumer Reports, work toward objectivity and therefore contain no advertising.
(B) However, single-copy sales are important: they bring in more revenue per magazine, because subscription prices are typically at least 50 percent less than the price of buying single issues.
(C) Further, potential readers explore a new magazine by buying a single issue; all those insert cards with subscription offers are included in magazines  to encourage you to subscribe. Some magazines are distributed only by subscription. Professional or trade magazines are specialized magazines and are often published by professional associations. They usually feature highly targeted advertising.
* revenue : 수입
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 

39.


It is postulated that such contamination may result from airborne transport from remote power plants or municipal incinerators.
An incident in Japan in the 1950s alerted the world to the



(A) Sometimes they may not strike the guilty person himself, but rather one of his relatives or tribesmen, to whom responsibility is extended. Disease, action that might produce disease, and recovery from  disease  are, therefore, of vital concern to the whole primitive community.
(B) Disease, as a sanction against social misbehavior,  becomes one of the most important pillars of  order  in such societies. It takes over, in many cases, the  role  played by policemen, judges, and priests in modern society.
(C) Among primitives, because of their supernaturalistic theories, the prevailing moral point of view gives  a  deeper meaning to disease. The gods who send disease   are usually angered by the moral offences of the individual. [3점]
* sanction : 제재
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38. 

potential problems of organic mercury in fish. Factories were discharging mercury into the waters of Minamata Bay, which also harbored a commercial fishing industry. Mercury was being bioaccumulated in the fish tissue and severe mercury poisoning occurred in many people who consumed the fish. ( ① ) The disabling neurological symptoms were subsequently called Minamata disease. ( ② ) Control over direct discharge of mercury from industrial operations is clearly needed for prevention. ( ③ ) However, it is now recognized that traces of mercury can appear in lakes far removed from any such industrial discharge. ( ④ ) Strictly controlled emission standards for such sources are needed to minimize this problem. ( ⑤ ) Fish advisories have been issued for many lakes in the United States; these recommend limits on the number of times per month particular species of fish should be consumed.
* postulate : 가정하다 ** incinerator: 소각로
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Both humans and rats have evolved taste preferences for sweet foods, which provide rich sources of calories. A study   of food preferences among the Hadza hunter-gatherers of Tanzania found that honey was the most highly preferred food item, an item that has the highest caloric value. ( ① ) Human newborn infants also show a strong preference for sweet liquids. ( ② ) Both humans and rats dislike bitter and sour foods, which tend to contain toxins. ( ③ ) They  also adaptively adjust their eating behavior in response to deficits in water, calories, and salt. ( ④ ) They  likewise  increase  their intake of sweets and water when their energy and f luids become depleted. ( ⑤ ) These appear to be specific evolved mechanisms, designed to deal with the adaptive problem of food selection, and coordinate consumption patterns with physical needs.
* deficiency : 결핍 ** deplete : 고갈시키다









Focusing on on-line interaction with people who are engaged  in  the  same  specialized  area  can    (A)  potential sources of information and thus make it less probable for (B) findings to happen.
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① limit	…… unexpected	② limit	…… distorted
③ diversify …… misleading	④ diversify …… accidental
⑤ provide …… novel



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




















41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Simplicity: The Essence of Great Novels
② Protagonists: A Key to Understanding Novels
③ Keep Your Memories Away from Novel Writing!
④ Character Traits Borrowed from People You Know
⑤ A Better Way to Use Yourself in Character Creation

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① objectively	② intuitively	③ devotedly
④ emotionally	⑤ favorably

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(B)
　Steve won the election. Upon hearing the result, Dave went over to Steve and congratulated (b) him, shaking his hand. Steve could still see the disappointment burning in his eyes. It wasn’t until later that evening, on the way home, that Dave said apologetically, “I’m so sorry, Steve! This election hasn’t damaged our friendship, has it?” “Of course not, Dave. We’re friends as always!” Steve responded with a smile. As Steve arrived home, his dad was proudly waiting for him and said, “Congratulations on the win! How did Dave take it?” Steve replied, “We’re fine now, best friends for life!” (c) His dad laughed, “Sounds like you won two battles today!”
(C)
　After class, Steve spotted Dave in the hallway and ran to him excitedly, “I’ve got good news! I’m going for student president and I think mine will be the only nomination.” Dave cleared his throat and replied with surprise, “Actually, I’ve just registered my name, too!” (d) He continued sharply, “Well, best of luck! But don’t think you’ll win the election, Steve.” Dave walked quickly away and from that moment on, there was an uncomfortable air of tension between the two friends. Steve tried to be friendly toward Dave, but he just didn’t seem to care.
(D)
　When the election day came, Steve found that his bicycle had a flat tire, so he started to run to school. Just as he reached the end of the street, Dave’s dad, who was driving Dave to school, pulled over to give him a ride. The dead silence in the car made the drive painful. Noticing the bad atmosphere, Dave’s dad said, “You know,  only one of you  can win. You have known each other since birth. Don’t let  this election ruin your friendship. Try to be happy for each other!” His words hit Dave hard. Looking at Steve, Dave felt the need to apologize to (e) him later that day.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 개학 날 아침에 Steve와 Dave는 함께 등교했다.
② Steve는 학생회장으로 당선되었다.
③ Steve는 Dave에게 선거 출마 사실을 숨겼다.
④ Dave의 아버지는 학교로 뛰어가던 Steve를 차에 태워 주었다.
⑤ Dave의 아버지는 선거로 인해 우정을 잃지 말라고 충고했다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. That would be great.
② Sure. We  had a great time.
③  Right. I already got a job.
④ Never. They haven’t seen it.
⑤ No. There’s no writing class.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I agree. But I don’t have the time for it.
② You’re right. Then I’ll never tell anyone.
③ Trust me. You’ll realize you did the right thing.
④ I understand. But let us know if it happens again.
⑤ That’s true. We’ve been practicing for a long time.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 농장 체험 프로그램을 홍보하려고
② 유산소 운동의 장점을 소개하려고
③ 가족 여행 준비물을 안내하려고
④ 유제품 보관 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 저지방 식단의 중요성을 강조하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 효과적인 독서를 위해서 집중력을 길러야 한다.
② 학습자의 수준에 맞는 영어 도서를 선택해야 한다.
③ 도전 욕구를 불러일으키는 과제는 학습 동기를 높인다.
④ 학습자의 흥미를 고려한 영어 읽기 자료를 개발해야 한다.
⑤ 사전을 활용한 어휘 학습은 영어 읽기 능력 향상에 도움이 된다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사회자 － 마술사	② 조련사 － 관람객
③ 무대감독 － 가수	④ 운전기사 － 정비사
⑤ 은행원 － 고객
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 연습 도와주기
② 생일 케이크 만들기
③ 카메라 가방 구매하기
④ 여분의 메모리 카드 찾기
⑤ 아이의 무대의상 가져오기


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 하이킹을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 휴대전화를 수리해야 해서
② 할머니를 찾아뵈어야 해서
③ 회사 회의에 참석해야 해서
④ 신상품 광고를 준비해야 해서
⑤ 친구들과 영화를 보러 가야 해서


9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36	② $40	③ $45	④ $47	⑤ $50


10. 대화를 듣고, World Furniture Expo에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 개최 기간	② 개최 장소	③ 참여 업체 수
④ 특별 강좌	⑤ 입장료


11. Creative Minds Science Club에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1학년과 2학년 학생이 가입할 수 있다.
② 매주 화요일 방과 후에 모인다.
③ 작년에 다수의 발명 대회에서 수상하였다.
④ 올해의 지도 교사는 물리 선생님이다.
⑤ 더 많은 정보를 학교 게시판에서 찾을 수 있다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	

12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 램프를 고르시오.	18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?




①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Probably not. You’d better see a doctor.
② It’s my fault. I should’ve told you  earlier.
③ That’s too bad. We  waited for you  today.
④ No problem. I can explain how to get there.
⑤ That’s right. We met in the library yesterday.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
①  That’s a good idea. I’ll get rid of it right away.
② I think it’s closed. Turn in the book tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re right. I’ll check with them.
④ It’s too late. The tickets are all sold out.
⑤ Here’s  the wallet. Take it to the station.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian:   	
① You can take a singing class at the local community center.
② Try to keep a close relationship with your classmates.
③ Would you give me some advice as a mentor?
④ You need to get help with your recommendation letter.
⑤ How about volunteering as a mentor at the community center?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① several ways flowers attract animals
② popular professions related to animals
③ various animals that feed from flowers
④ major factors that pose a threat to animals
⑤ endangered animals living on tropical islands

17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① hummingbirds	② bats	③ lizards
④ parrots	⑤ squirrels




　Want to improve your Korean writing? Writing is an essential tool that will help you adjust to Korean university life. The Ha-Rang Writing Center offers a free tutoring program open to all international students at our university. We encourage you to take advantage of this. The program has always been very popular among international students. Registration opens from November 28 for three days only. Once you are registered, we will match you with a perfect tutor and contact you to arrange your schedule. We are sure that you will be satisfied with our well-experienced tutors. Don’t miss this great opportunity to improve your Korean writing. For more information, feel free to email Jiyung Yoon, HRWC Director, at jyoon@hrwc.org.

① 한국의 대학 생활과 관련한 유의 사항을 알리려고
② 한국어 글쓰기 강좌의 변경된 등록 절차를 공지하려고
③ 한국어 글쓰기 지도를 받을 외국인 학생을 모집하려고
④ 외국인 학생을 위한 글쓰기 센터 설립을 건의하려고
⑤ 한국어 글쓰기 지도 강사의 자격 요건을 안내하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Breaden의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　All smiling, Breaden, a cute three-year-old boy, was walking along the aisle of snacks, bars, and sweets. It was the aisle of all kinds of temptation for him. “Wow!” he exclaimed. Right in front of his eyes were rows of delicious-looking chocolate bars waiting to be touched. His mom was holding his hand. Breaden, her only child, had always been the focus of her attention and she was cautious not to lose him in the market. Suddenly, she stopped to say hello to her friends. Breaden stopped, too. With his eyes wide open and his mouth watering, Breaden stretched out his arm and was about to grab a bar when he felt a tight grip on his hand. He looked up. “Breaden, not today!” He knew what that meant. “Okay, Mommy,” he sighed. His shoulders fell.
① excited    → disappointed    ② embarrassed → satisfied
③ lonely     → pleased	④ annoyed       → relieved
⑤ delighted → jealous

20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Many present efforts to guard and maintain  human  progress, to meet human needs, and to realize  human ambitions are simply unsustainable ─ in both the rich and poor nations. They draw too heavily, too quickly, on already overdrawn environmental resource accounts to be affordable
far into the future without bankrupting those accounts. They may show profit on the balance sheets of our generation, but our children will inherit the losses. We borrow environmental capital from future generations with no intention or prospect of repaying. They may blame us for our wasteful ways, but they can never collect on our debt to them. We act as we do because we can get away with it: future generations do not vote; they have no political or financial power; they cannot challenge our decisions.
① 환경 문제를 해결하기 위한 세대 간 협력이 중요하다.
② 인류의 발전은 다양한 환경 자원의 개발에 달려 있다.
③ 미래의 환경 문제에 대비한 국제 사회의 공조가 필요하다.
④ 선진국들은 경제력을 기반으로 환경 자원을 선점하고 있다.
⑤ 현세대는 미래 세대에 대한 고려 없이 환경 자원을 남용하고 있다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The precision of the lines on the map, the consistency with which symbols are used, the grid and/or projection system, the apparent certainty with which place names are written and placed, and the legend and scale information all give the map an aura of scientific accuracy and objectivity. Although subjective interpretation goes into the construction of these cartographic elements, the finished map appears to express an authoritative truth about the world, separate from any interests and influences. The very trust that this apparent objectivity inspires is what makes maps such powerful carriers of ideology. However unnoticeably, maps do indeed reflect the world views of either their makers or, more probably, the supporters of their makers, in addition to the political and social conditions under which they were made. Some of the simple ideological messages that maps can convey include: This land is and has long been ours; here is the center of the universe; if we do not claim this land, the enemies you most fear will.
* aura : 기운, 분위기 ** cartographic : 지도 제작(법)의
① the authority derived from trustworthy maps
② political and social conflicts caused by  maps
③ ideologies lying beneath the objectivity of maps
④ the conditions essential to making a map accurate
⑤ subjectivity defining the creativity of map-making

[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. As a system for transmitting specific factual information without any distortion or ambiguity, the sign system of honey-bees would probably win easily over human language every time. However, language offers something more valuable than mere information exchange. Because the meanings of words are not invariable and because understanding always involves interpretation, the act of communicating is always a joint, creative effort. Words can carry meanings beyond those consciously intended by speakers or writers because listeners or readers bring their own perspectives to the language they encounter. Ideas expressed imprecisely may be more intellectually stimulating for listeners or readers than simple facts. The fact that language is not always reliable for causing precise meanings to be generated in someone else’s mind is a reflection of its powerful strength as a medium for creating new understanding. It is the inherent ambiguity and adaptability of language as a meaning-making system that makes the relationship between language and thinking so special.
* distortion : 왜곡, 곡해
① Erase Ambiguity in Language Production!
② Not Creative but Simple: The Way Language Works
③ Communication as a Universal Goal in Language Use
④ What in Language Creates Varied Understanding?
⑤ Language: A Crystal-Clear Looking Glass
23. 
The film director, as compared to the theater director, has as his material, the finished, recorded celluloid. This material from which his final work is composed consists not of living men or real landscapes, not of real, actual stage-sets, but only of their images, recorded on separate strips that can be shortened, altered, and assembled according to his will. The elements of reality are fixed on these pieces; by combining them in his selected sequence, shortening and lengthening them according to his desire, the director builds up his own “filmic” time and “filmic” space. He does not adapt reality, but uses it for the creation of a new reality, and the most characteristic and important aspect of this process is that, in it, laws of space and time invariable and inescapable in work with actuality become obedient. The film assembles from them a new reality proper only to itself.
① A Reality in the Film Director’s Hands
② The Director’s Reality Never  Changes
③ Innovative Technology in Film Editing
④ A Filmic World: Lost in Time and Space
⑤ Film Making: Exploration into the Unknown


24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　The two pie charts above show how much of  the  information found using search engines is considered to be accurate or trustworthy by two groups of respondents (AP & NWP teachers and U.S. adult search users) in 2012. ① As for
AP & NWP teachers, five percent say that “All / Almost all”
of the information found using search engines is accurate or trustworthy, while 28 percent  of U.S. adult search users say  the same. ② The largest percentage of both AP & NWP teachers and U.S. adult search users answer that “Most” of    the information is accurate or trustworthy. ③ In addition, 40 percent of AP & NWP teachers say that “Some” of the information is accurate or trustworthy, and more than 30 percent of U.S. adult search users respond the same. ④ U.S. adult search users saying that “Very little / None” of the information found using search engines is accurate or trustworthy account for less than five percent. ⑤ The percentage of U.S. adult search users who answer “Don’t know” is only one percent.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Milo? Forman에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? Even though he won many Academy  Awards,  Milo? Forman was not a U.S. born filmmaker. Forman grew up in a small town near Prague. Orphaned when his parents died
during World War II, he was raised by his relatives. In the 1950s, Forman studied film at the film school of the University of Prague. Throughout the late 1950s and early 1960s, Forman acted as either writer or assistant director on several films. Later, he emigrated to the U.S. and continued to make films. In 1975, he directed One Flew over the Cuckoo’s Nest, which became only the second film in history to win Oscars in all the five major categories. Afterward, the movie Amadeus, a celebration of the genius of Mozart, which he also directed, swept eight Oscars including one for best director. With Jan Nov?k, Forman wrote his autobiography, Turnaround: A Memoir, which was published in 1994.
① Prague 근교의 작은 마을에서 성장했다.
② Prague 대학교에서 영화를 공부했다.
③ 미국으로 이주한 후에도 계속 영화를 만들었다.
④ 영화 Amadeus로 오스카 최고 감독상을 수상했다.
⑤ Turnaround: A Memoir를 단독으로 집필했다.



26. Fremont Art College’s 7th Annual Art Exhibition에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Fremont Art College?s 7th Annual ART EXHIBITION
November 21－27
3rd Floor Gallery in the Student Union
Hours: 10:00 a.m.－5:00 p.m. (Monday － Friday) 11:00 a.m.－3:00 p.m. (Saturday & Sunday)
?Fremont  Art  College  will  be  hosting  its  7th  Annual Art Exhibition for one week.
?Paintings, ceramic works, and photographs submitted by students will be exhibited. All exhibits are for sale, and all money raised will be donated to charity.
?The exhibition is free to all.
?Taking photos is allowed inside the exhibition hall.
?Free snacks will be available at the cafeteria.
　For more information, please visit our website at www.fremontart.edu.

① 개장 시간은 주중과 주말이 다르다.
② 학생들이 출품한 사진이 전시될 예정이다.
③ 모든 전시품은 판매되지 않는다.
④ 전시회장 내에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.
⑤ 카페테리아에서 간식이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
27. 
Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens
October 1－October 31
◈ Morning Walk
－ The number of participants is limited to 20.
－ The walk will be cancelled in the event of rain.
◈ Fun Activities
－ Enjoy exciting activities such as kite flying and sandcastle building for free.
－ Spend a day or two camping.
◈ Tips for Your Visit
－ Sitting on lawns is not permitted.
－ Audio devices may only be used with headphones.
◈ Parking
－ The parking lot is open from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. every day.
－ The parking fee is $10 a day.
◈ For more information, visit www.fffbg.com.

① 아침 산책은 비가 내려도 진행된다.
② 연날리기와 모래성 쌓기는 무료이다.
③ 잔디밭에 앉는 것이 허용된다.
④ 헤드폰 없이 오디오 장치를 사용할 수 있다.
⑤ 주차 요금은 무료이다.





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　When people face real adversity ─ disease, unemployment, or the disabilities of age ─ affection from a pet takes on new meaning. A pet’s continuing affection becomes crucially important for ① those enduring hardship because it reassures them that their core essence has not been damaged. Thus pets are important in the treatment of ② depressed or chronically ill patients. In addition, pets are ③ used  to great advantage with
the institutionalized aged. In such institutions it is difficult for the staff to retain optimism when all the patients are declining in  health. Children who visit cannot help but  remember
④ what  their  parents  or  grandparents  once  were  and  be
depressed by their incapacities. Animals, however, have no expectations about mental capacity. They do not worship youth. They have no memories about what the aged once
⑤ was and greet them as if they were children. An old man
holding a puppy can relive a childhood moment with complete accuracy. His joy and the animal’s response are the same.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When teachers work in isolation, they tend to see the world through one set of eyes ─ their own. The fact that there might be someone somewhere in the same building or district who may  be  more  successful  at  teaching  this  or  that  subject  or
lesson is (A) based / lost on teachers who close the door and work their way through the school calendar virtually alone. In the absence of a process that (B) allows / forbids them to benchmark those who do things better or at least differently, teachers  are  left  with  that  one  perspective ─ their  own.  I
taught various subjects under the social studies umbrella and
had very little idea of how my peers who taught the same subject did what they did. The idea of meeting regularly to compare notes, plan common assessments, and share what we did well (C) mostly / never occurred to us. Rather, we spent much time in the social studies office complaining about a lack of time and playing the blame game.
(A) (B)	(C)
① based …… allows …… never
② based  …… forbids …… mostly
③ lost     …… allows  …… mostly
④ lost     …… allows  …… never
⑤ lost     …… forbids …… never








30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? Dr. Paul Odland and his friend Bob travel frequently  to South America, where they provide free medical treatment for disabled children of poor families. One day, they went to a local  marketplace.  Paul  wanted  to  buy  some souvenirs, and
① he spotted a carving that he liked. The non-English speaking seller was asking 500 pesos for the carving. With Bob acting as interpreter, Paul offered 300 and ② his opponent proposed 450. The bargaining in the noisy market became spirited, even intense, with Paul stepping up ③ his price slightly and the seller going down slowly. The pace increased
so fast that Bob could not keep up with the back-and-forth interpretation. Meanwhile, observing the seller carefully, Paul sensed something wrong in Bob’s interpretation. In fact, the seller had gone below Paul’s last offer. When Paul raised his doubt, Bob instantly recognized the error and corrected ④ his
interpretation. At length, they settled the deal, and ⑤ he was
delighted to purchase the carving at a reasonable price and thanked Bob.

[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The creativity that children possess needs to be cultivated throughout their development. Research suggests that overstructuring the child’s environment may actually limit creative and academic development. This is a central problem with much of science instruction. The exercises or activities  are devised to eliminate different options and to focus on predetermined results. The answers are structured to fit the course assessments, and the wonder of science is lost along with cognitive intrigue. We define cognitive intrigue as the wonder that stimulates and intrinsically motivates an  individual to voluntarily engage in an activity. The loss of cognitive intrigue may be initiated by the sole use of  play items with predetermined conclusions and reinforced by rote instruction in school. This is exemplified by toys, games, and lessons  that are a(n) 	in and of themselves and require little of the individual other than to master the planned objective. [3점]
* rote : 기계적인 암기
① end	② input	③ puzzle
④ interest	⑤ alternative








32. Temporal resolution is particularly interesting in the context of satellite remote sensing. The temporal density of remotely sensed imagery is large, impressive, and growing. Satellites are collecting a great deal of imagery as you read this sentence. However, most applications in geography and environmental studies do not require extremely fine-grained temporal resolution. Meteorologists may require visible, infrared, and radar information at sub-hourly temporal resolution; urban planners might require imagery at monthly or annual resolution; and transportation planners may not need any time series information at all for some applications. Again, the temporal resolution of imagery used should
 	. Sometimes researchers have to search archives of aerial photographs to  get information from that past that pre-date the collection of satellite imagery. [3점]
* meteorologist : 기상학자 ** infrared : 적외선의
① be selected for general purposes
② meet the requirements of your inquiry
③ be as high as possible for any occasion
④ be applied to new technology by experts
⑤ rely exclusively upon satellite information





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Grief is unpleasant. Would one not then be better off without it altogether? Why accept it even when the loss is real? Perhaps we should say of it what Spinoza said of regret: that whoever feels it is “twice unhappy or twice helpless.” Laurence Thomas has suggested that the utility of “negative sentiments” (emotions like grief, guilt, resentment, and anger, which there is seemingly a reason to believe we might be better off without) lies in their providing a kind of guarantee of authenticity for such dispositional sentiments as love and respect. No occurrent feelings of love and respect need to be present throughout the period in which it is true that one loves or respects. One might therefore sometimes suspect, in the absence of the positive occurrent feelings, that
 	. At such times, negative emotions like grief offer a kind of testimonial to the authenticity of love or respect. [3점]
* dispositional : 성향적인 ** testimonial: 증거
① one no longer loves
② one is much happier
③ an emotional loss can never be real
④ respect for oneself can be guaranteed
⑤ negative sentiments do not hold any longer






34. Over a period of time the buildings which housed social, legal, religious, and other rituals evolved into forms that we subsequently have come 	. This is a two-way process; the building provides the physical environment and setting for a particular social ritual such as traveling by train or going to the theater, as well as the symbolic setting. The meaning of buildings evolves and becomes established by experience and we in turn read our experience into buildings. Buildings arouse an empathetic reaction in us through these projected experiences, and the strength of these reactions is determined by our culture, our beliefs, and our expectations. They tell stories, for their form and spatial organization give us hints about how they should be used. Their physical layout encourages some uses and inhibits others; we do not go backstage in a theater unless especially invited. Inside a law court the precise location of those involved in the legal process is an integral part of the design and an essential part of ensuring that the law is upheld. [3점]
* empathetic : 공감할 수 있는
① to identify and relate to a new architectural trend
② to recognize and associate with those buildings’ function
③ to define and refine by reflecting cross-cultural interactions
④ to use and change into an integral part of our environment
⑤ to alter and develop for the elimination of their meanings
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Most often, you will find or meet people who introduce themselves in terms of their work or by what they spend time on. These people introduce themselves as a salesman or an executive.  ① There  is  nothing  criminal  in  doing  this,  but
psychologically, we become what we believe. ② Identifying
what we can do in the workplace serves to enhance the quality of our professional career. ③ People who follow this practice tend to lose their individuality and begin to live with the notion that they are recognized by the job they do. ④ However, jobs may not be permanent, and you may lose your job for  countless reasons, some of which you may not even be responsible for. ⑤ In such a case, these people suffer from an inevitable social and mental trauma, leading to  emotional stress and a feeling that all of a sudden they have been disassociated from what once was their identity.









[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 


(A) So, if you are learning to play a new sport, it is better to begin it alone, but when you become skilled at it, then you will probably perform better with an audience.
(B) There are many instances of well-known actors who, in mid-career, develop stage fright and simply cannot perform. The other extreme is that being observed enhances performance, people doing whatever it might be better when they know that others are watching.
(C) The general rule seems to be that if one is doing something new or for the first time, then being observed while doing it decreases performance. On the other hand, being observed while doing some task or engaging in some activity that is well known or well practiced tends to enhance performance.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


37. 


　Evolution works to maximize the number of descendants that an animal leaves behind. Where the risk of death from fishing increases as an animal grows, evolution favors
those that grow slowly, mature younger and smaller,  and

39.





I expect that global society will increase annual investments

reproduce earlier.

(A) Surely these adaptations are good news for species hard-pressed by excessive fishing? Not exactly. Young fish produce many fewer eggs than large-bodied animals, and many industrial fisheries are now so intensive that few animals survive more than a couple of years beyond the age of maturity.
(B) This is exactly what we now see in the wild. Cod in Canada’s Gulf of St. Lawrence begin to reproduce at around four today; forty years ago they had to wait until six or seven to reach maturity. Sole in the North Sea mature at half the body weight they did in 1950.
(C) Together this means there are fewer eggs and larvae to secure future generations. In some cases the amount of young produced today is a hundred or even a thousand times less than in the past, putting the survival of species, and the fisheries dependent on them, at grave risk. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38. 

from 24% today to 36% of the GDP in 2052. Much of this investment will be in energy-efficient goods that are more expensive than old-fashioned stuff designed for an era of
cheap energy. ( ① ) Another share will be invested in the shift from coal to more expensive fuels, like conventional gas. ( ② ) Some will go into the construction of new renewable energy
supply,  even during the years before it becomes competitive.    ( ③ ) And a lot will go into repair of climate damage or adaptation to future climate damage ─ for  example,  investing in new protective walls along the coast to keep the  rising ocean back. ( ④ ) These huge increases in investment would not come about if investment was left to the market. ( ⑤ ) It will  be  either  direct,  when  the  government  invests  the  tax
dollars in whatever capacity it considers to be most necessary, or indirect, when the government passes legislation that makes the desired activity more profitable.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　What is the best order for a report, paper or other technical document? Of course, it must be logical; but that means  simply that the paper must have  connection  and  sequence, and a variety of orders is possible under this heading. Too many writers interpret the term logical to mean chronological, and it has become habitual to begin reports and papers with careful  reviews  of  previous  work.  ( ① )  Usually,  this  is
tactically  weak.  ( ② )  Therefore,  to  rehearse  to  them  the
findings of previous work is simply to bore them with unnecessary reminders. (  ③ ) The interesting thing for them  is the new information ─ the new findings and conclusions.     ( ④ )  So  it  is  usually  best  to  start  with  those  pieces  of
information.  (  ⑤ )  To  give  a  long  chronological account of
work or procedures is normally appropriate only when the essential point of the paper is the chronological sequence.
* chronological : 연대순의











(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① weigh   …… dissimilar	② weigh   …… common
③ weigh   …… balanced	④ control  …… favorable
⑤ control …… conflicting



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)

















(C)








41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Timepieces Bring to Our Lives
② Research into Time: Precision vs. Duration
③ Flight from Time: A New Direction for Physics
④ The Peaceful Coexistence of Science and Baseball
⑤ How Long, How Fast: A Matter of Time Perception

42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① delayed	…… faster	② internal	…… slower
③ accurate	…… slower	④ imprecise …… faster
⑤ mysterious …… slower

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
(D) 

　But when Erik introduced Keith and his producer Manfred to the piano on the stage that afternoon, it didn’t go well. Keith and Manfred played a few notes. Then after a long silence, Manfred came to (e) him and said, “Erik, if you don’t get another piano, Keith can’t play tonight.” Erik knew that Keith had requested a specific instrument, which the Opera House had agreed to provide. What he hadn’t realized was that the administrative staff hadn’t been able to find the requested B?sendorfer piano, and they had instead installed a tiny little B?sendorfer that was in poor condition.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 연주회의 표가 매진되었다.
② 연주가 시작되자마자 관객들은 감동을 받았다.
③ Keith는 충분한 피아노 음량을 만들기 위해 노력했다.
④ Keith는 빗속에 서 있는 Erik을 보고도 외면했다.
⑤ Keith와 Manfred는 연주회장의 피아노를 쳐 보았다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2013학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역 (A형)
6.대화를 듣고, 여자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① You must get it dry­cleaned.
② No, we don’t have large sizes.
③ Of course, it goes with your pants.
④ Sure, we have pink, red and green.
⑤ I have a blue one with long sleeves.

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Take an umbrella just in case.
② I usually stay at home on Sundays.
③ I should have canceled the meeting.
④ We visited the weather center last year.
⑤ I’m happy to go hiking on this beautiful day.

3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① You can visit the website and sign up for it.
② It can be a way of learning a foreign language.
③ I just don’t understand how to use this program.
④ Please send me the images through the Internet.
⑤ You can make foreign friends in your language course.

4.대화를 듣고, 그림에서 남자가 찾는 책이 위치한 곳을 고르시오.


5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 선물 고르는 법을 조언하려고
② 모임의 일정 변경을 공지하려고
③ 조언에 대해 감사를 표현하려고
④ 초대장의 작성 절차를 설명하려고
⑤ 초대를 거절하는 방법을 알려주려고

① 물자 절약을 생활화하자.
② 충전식 건전지를 사용하자.
③ 쓰레기 종량제를 실천하자.
④ 친환경 제품 사용을 늘리자.
⑤ 폐건전지를 분리해서 버리자.

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 신소재 섬유의 다양한 용도
② 헤어스프레이 사용 자제의 필요성
③ 식기세척기용 세제 사용 시 유의점
④ 옷에 묻은 잉크 얼룩을 제거하는 요령
⑤ 옷감의 재질에 따른 올바른 세탁 방법

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

① 세대 간 문화 공유의 중요성
② 학업 스트레스를 줄이는 방법
③ 건강을 위한 여가 활동의 종류
④ 건전한 공연 문화의 정착 방안
⑤ 청소년 문화 공간 확충의 필요성

9.대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① curator - visitor	② painter - talk show host
③ tourist - tour guide	④ journalist - photographer
⑤ explorer - producer


10. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.






2	영어 영역 (A형)


1 . 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 청첩장 발송하기	② 저녁식사 준비하기
③ 설문 결과 정리하기	④ 신혼여행 예약하기
⑤ 웨딩 플래너 소개하기

12.대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 행사장 준비	② 자매 학교 방문
③ 연설 원고 교정	④ 참고 도서 추천
⑤ 발표 날짜 연기

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 언급한 테이블 램프의 문제점을 고르 시오.

① 전등 갓 불량	② 전구 파손
③ 전원 코드 이상	④ 색상 차이
⑤ 점등 버튼 오작동

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지하철 이용을 선호하는 이유를 고르 시오.

① 교통 체증이 없기 때문에
② 환경을 보호할 수 있기 때문에
③ 교통비를 절약할 수 있기 때문에
④ 건강에 여러모로 도움이 되기 때문에
⑤ 출퇴근 시간을 다양하게 활용할 수 있기 때문에

15.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $18	② $20	③ $24	④ $27	⑤ $30

16. 2013 Talent Show의 오디션에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]


① 이틀에 걸쳐 진행된다.
② 첫째 날에 댄스 오디션이 있다.
③ 지원자 수에는 제한이 없다.
④ 지원서를 학생회실에 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 토요일이다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 구입할 컴퓨터를 고르시오.

18. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:  	

① Actually, I paid with my credit card.
② Okay. How much should I pay for it?
③ No. I still want to cancel my reservation.
④ Sorry, but can you tell me where my package is now?
⑤ This is obviously your fault, so I want to get a full refund.


19. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

Man:  	

① Sorry, City Hall is closed on Wednesdays.
② Well, my passport expires at the end of the year.
③ Backpacking is fun, but it can also be pretty tough.
④ Great, I’ll call the office and find out more about it.
⑤ Our company has a system of flexible working hours.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Sujin에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

Minsu:  	

① Don’t hurry. First think, then speak.
② Cheer up! When one door shuts, another opens.
③ Let’s give it a try. Experience is the best teacher.
④ Be careful. A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
⑤ Give me a hand. A friend in need is a friend indeed.


[21~22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21.남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 주연 배우 변경을 알리려고
② 배우 선발 결과를 발표하려고
③ 변경된 공연 장소를 공지하려고
④ 관람 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 공연 시간 지연에 대해 사과하려고



2 .다음 중 남자가 언급하지 않은 내용은?
① 공연 장소	② 주연 배우 이름
③ 공연 시간	④ 안내 데스크 위치
⑤ 환불 방법






영어 영역 (A형)	3

23.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?

　One of the key fears we all have is fear that this is the wrong time to start whatever our project is, and we should wait until the “time is right.” Tim Ferriss, author of the bestselling   book   The   4­Hour     Workweek,     has   this   to   say about timing: “For all the most important things, the timing is always wrong. Waiting for a good time to quit your job? The stars will never align and the traffic lights of life will never all be green at the same time. Conditions are never perfect. ‘Someday’ is a disease that will take your dreams to the grave with you. If it’s important to you and you want to do it ‘eventually,’ just do it and correct course along the way.” If you wait for the timing to be right before you make a move, you may never make a move at all.

① 과거의 실패에 얽매이지 마라.
② 성공을 위해 일의 우선순위를 정하라.
③ 결과보다는 노력의 과정에 의미를 부여하라.
④ 꿈을 실현하기 위한 구체적인 계획을 세워라.
⑤ 원하는 일은 때를 기다리지 말고 바로 실행하라.









24.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

　I am Nick Kane, a local county 15­year business owner. During my wife Ilene’s marathon training, I have become aware of how many perfectly good pairs of shoes she goes through. The shoes become, very quickly, beyond race condition but are in perfect condition for everyday use. So I have arranged to place “drop boxes” throughout the area, collecting approximately 100 pairs of shoes a month. As of now, I have made arrangements to donate all gently worn shoes to shelters and organizations in need. For better public access, I am writing to request permission to place the box by the main entrance of your building. It would be a service for the community and our environment. Once more, I request your cooperation in full spirit.

① 신발 기증에 대해 감사하려고
② 마라톤 경기 참여를 권장하려고
③ 운동화 관리 방법을 알려주려고
④ 신발 수거함 설치 허가를 요청하려고
⑤ 기능성 운동화의 문제점을 지적하려고

25.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Your first day of work is a whirlwind of introductions and meetings. You will meet many different people, receive a phonebook­sized pack of information about your healthcare plan and be walked through the “simple” 30­step process for clearing a paper jam in the copy machine. This is exactly the right time to take notes; you will thank yourself later. If you are an expert with your handheld, write down notes electronically. Otherwise, invest in a small notebook that you can stick in your pocket and pull out when your boss starts explaining something important. Names and positions are probably the most important notes to take; people like to think they are memorable enough for you to remember their names.	* handheld: 손에 쥘 만한 크기의 컴퓨터

① 첫 출근 시 메모하는 것이 도움이 된다.
② 폭 넓은 대인관계가 성공의 기반이 된다.
③ 전자기기 활용은 업무의 효율성을 높인다.
④ 출근하자마자 하루의 일과를 계획해야 한다.
⑤ 담당 업무에 대하여 전문성을 갖추어야 한다.










26.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

　With seven billion mouths to feed, human agriculture takes a tremendous toll on the planet, from energy use to habitat loss. But there is also a growing set of solutions, from organic agriculture to integrated pest control. More people around the world are taking a look at urban farming, which allows us to make our food as “local” as possible. By growing what we need near where we live, we decrease the “foodmiles” associated with long­distance transportation. Also, urban agriculture can add greenery to cities, reducing pollution, increasing shade, and preventing the unpleasant heat island effect. Garden plots can help people reconnect with the Earth, and gain a greater appreciation for where our food comes from. Rooftop and patio gardens create peaceful places for relaxation and they can attract tourists.
* plot: 작은 구획의 땅

① 도시 농업의 이점
② 농산물 직거래의 필요성
③ 유기농법의 경제적 득과 실
④ 정원 가꾸기의 정서 함양 효과
⑤ 대규모 경작이 환경에 미치는 영향






4	영어 영역 (A형)


27.다음 안내문에 소개된 화분에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
28. 
Archaeology Day 2013에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치 하지 않는 것은?




① 자연분해되지 않는다.
② 묘종을 옮겨 심을 때 제거된다.
③ 콩성분 잉크 신문지로 만들 수 없다.
④ 제작 시 동일한 크기의 캔이 필요하다.
⑤ 형태 고정 시 테이프를 사용할 수 없다.









① 7월 중 이틀 동안 열린다.
② 고대 사냥기술을 체험할 수 있다.
③ 퍼즐 우승자는 박물관 1년 회원권을 받는다.
④ 교사 대상 세미나는 일요일 오전에 열린다.
⑤ 박물관 회원은 무료로 입장한다.







영어 영역 (A형)	5

29.다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

30.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The above graph shows the distribution of males and females across major occupations in Canada in 2009. ① In general, the highest percentage of women worked in Business & Administration and, for men, in Trades & Transport. ② More than half of employed women were in two occupational groups: Business & Administration and Sales & Service. ③ The percentage of women employed in Social Science & Education was more than twice the percentage of men employed in the same field. ④ More women worked in fields related to Health than in Management. ⑤ The difference in percentage between men and women was the greatest in the Trades & Transport section, which was followed by Sales & Service.

31. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

The lizards that climb walls and ceilings do not tend to

fall  off.  But  it  is not (A)	they have great





① 병원이 Longwood역에서 도보 가능한 거리에 있다.
② 통근자 전용열차를 이용하여 Boston으로 올 수 있다.
③ 장애우들에게 무료 교통수단이 제공된다.
④ THE RIDE를 이용하려면 사전에 신청서를 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 전화로 Boston 대중교통에 관한 추가정보를 얻을 수 있다.

suction ― as a matter of fact, they are not really using suction at all. Here is how the feet work: on the bottom are dozens and dozens of tiny grooves, which you can see if you have ever looked closely at a lizard in a terrarium. On each of those little grooves you can see, there are dozens more (B) that / what are not visible to the naked eye. And on each of those dozens of grooves  (C) hundreds, if not thousands, of hairlike bumps. Now, if you take a microscopic look at even the smoothest surface, you will see it is covered with microscopic pits, bumps, and grooves.	* groove: 가늘고 길게 패인 곳

(A) (B)	(C)
①  why	……	that	……	is
②  why	……	what	……	is
③  because	……	that	……	are
④  because	……	what	……	are
⑤ because	……	that	……	is







6	영어 영역 (A형)


32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]

　The decline in manufacturing will inevitably bring about a new protectionism. The first reaction to a period of turbulence is to try to build a wall that ① shields one’s own garden from the cold winds outside. But such walls no longer protect businesses that do not meet world standards. It will only make them more ② prosperous. The best example is Mexico, which had a deliberate policy of building its domestic economy ③ independent of the outside world. It did this not only by building high walls of protectionism to keep foreign competition out, but by practically forbidding its own companies to export. This attempt to create a purely Mexican economy ④ failed. Mexico actually became increasingly dependent on imports from other countries. It was finally ⑤ obliged to open itself to the outside world.

3 .다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I had never been on a roller coaster. Today, I was faced with one. There was some kind of bar, which was raised in front of me and was brought back into my lap. My heart started to pound. Trying to put myself at ease, I held tightly onto the bar in my lap. The cars jumped a bit and we began moving along the track. Now, I could even hear heartbeats, louder than the “clickity­click” sound coming from under the cars. We moved from a horizontal position to a steep incline and the roller coaster began ascending to the top of that first hill. My heart pounded wildly! I could not look out over the side of the car. Even before the coaster began to fall down, I was in a total panic.
① doubtful	② terrified	③ depressed
④ indifferent	⑤ sympathetic

[34~36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. The relationship between physical products and individual ownership is undergoing a profound evolution. We don’t
want the CD; we want the music it plays. We don’t want the disc; we want the storage it holds. We don’t want the answering machine; we want the messages it saves. We don’t want the DVD; we want the movie it carries. In other words, we want not the stuff but the needs or experiences it fulfills. As our possessions “dematerialize” into the intangible, our preconceptions of ownership are changing, creating a dotted line between “what’s mine,” “what’s yours,” and “what’s ours.” This shift is fueling a world where 	has more value than possession, and as Kevin Kelly, a founder of Wired magazine, puts it, where “access is better than ownership.” [3점]

① disposal	② donation	③ usage
④ cooperation	⑤ intelligence
35. 
Desserts are hard to resist. But the resistance is a little easier when their scent is intense. According to a recent study in the journal Flavour, when we experience a strong
complementary aroma with our food, we take smaller bites. The scent of coffee in a mocha dessert can be a good example. It is thought that there is some sort of feedback loop happening in our brains: a strong complementary smell makes us 	. Next time you serve a sweet treat at a dinner party, think about lighting a vanilla­scented candle. The scent of the candle may help your friends not overeat. Or when you order a dessert at a restaurant, pair it with strong­smelling coffee. You can find its flavor goes into effect.

① regain our appetite
② reduce our food intake
③ relax the mind and body
④ fall into a romantic mood
⑤ distinguish between different scents












36. Scientists and educators have long sought to understand the emergence of expertise, artistic and otherwise. Many
researchers have argued that exceptional achievement can simply come down to 	. Studies of eminent scientists in the 1950s supported this view by underscoring the individuals’ capacity for endurance, concentration and commitment to effortful practice. Benjamin Bloom, an education psychologist, wrote in 1985 that none of his subjects achieved expertise without a supportive environment and a long and intensive period of training. This education came first from encouraging instructors and later from demanding master teachers. A few years later psychologist
K. Anders Ericsson of Florida State University conducted studies of experts in piano, violin, chess, or athletics. The investigations revealed that a person’s level of achievement correlated strongly with the amount of practice put in. [3점]

① hard work
② deep insight
③ physical strength
④ emotional stability
⑤ extraordinary talent




영어 영역 (A형)	7

37.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

　Dogs’ ability to learn about humans is amazing. They respond to our gestures, attend to our body language, and follow our gaze to figure out what we are looking at. They are even known to repeat human yawns. As the longest­domesticated species, dogs have evolved alongside humans, selected over thousands of years for traits that make them especially sensitive to our cues.       (A)       , it is found that puppies only a few weeks old could interpret human signals, while full­grown wolves raised by humans could not.  Dogs read  people better than chimpanzees, humans’ closest primate relative, according to the research published this year. (B)   , the most   accurate comparison is to a human child: dogs have the social cognition capacities of a 2­year­old.

(A) (B)

①
However
……
In conclusion
②
However
……
Otherwise
③
Additionally
……
In fact
④
Additionally
……
For example
⑤
In comparison
……
That is to say










38.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?

　At Harvard many students are so impatient to shine that they try to peak before their full growth, not having time to ponder deeply. ① Being aware of this, the dean, Harry
R. Lewis, asks freshmen to slow down and get more out of college by doing less. ② Dean Lewis does not want to discourage achievement, yet he insists that students are more likely to sustain the effort required if they allow time for leisure and solitude. ③ He cautions students not to pack their schedule with so many activities that they have no time to think about why they are doing what they are doing. ④ He asserts that the more work students do at one time, the more successful their school life will be. ⑤ Most precious is their freedom to choose, he insists, which they can maintain only by allowing for unstructured time and flexibility.

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? [3점]


　Because of the transmission of identity from one generation to the next, most children share at least some traits with their parents. These are vertical identities. ( ① ) Attributes and values are passed down from parents to child across the generations not only through strands of DNA, but also through shared cultural norms. ( ② ) Language, for example, is usually vertical, since most people who speak Greek raise their children to speak Greek, too. ( ③ ) Such identities may reflect recessive genes, or values and preferences that a child does not share with his ancestors. ( ④ ) Criminal behavior is often horizontal; most criminals are not raised by gangsters and must invent their own deceptive character. ( ⑤ ) So are conditions such as autism and intellectual disability.	* autism: 자폐증










40.주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A) After that, pour the soap into the mold and allow it to completely harden. Now you have your own special soap!

(B) Next, put them in a heat­resistant glass bowl. Put this bowl in the microwave and heat it for 45 seconds.

(C) And then, carefully stir the soap until all the chunks are completely gone. Then, add the essential oils. You can add herbs if you want.

① (A)-(C)-(B)	② (B)-(A)-(C)	③ (B)-(C)-(A)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)	⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)





8	영어 영역 (A형)


[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)












(C)


(D) 



41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① The Miracle of Storytelling
② The History of Picture Books
③ Why Early Education Matters
④ Reading Regularly: The Key to Success
⑤ Illustrations: The Facilitator of Imagination

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

① confidence	② creativity
③ leadership	④ persistence
⑤ responsibility


[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음 에 답하시오.
(A)

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① (B)-(D)-(C)	② (C)-(B)-(D)
③ (C)-(D)-(B)	④ (D)-(B)-(C)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

4 .밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?

① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.위 글의 college girl에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 비행기를 몇 시간 동안 기다렸다.
② 공항 상점에서 책을 구매했다.
③ 짐 속에서 쿠키를 발견했다.
④ 노부인에게 정중히 사과했다.
⑤ 노부인과 쿠키를 같이 먹었다.





2014학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s  my  brother David.
② She  likes  taking pictures.
③ He’s  playing  in  the yard.
④ He had a happy childhood.
⑤ There are four in my family.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Really? I’m proud of you.
② Okay. You can come with me.
③ No. I’ll be fine with some rest.
④ Oh, no! I’ll get you some water.
⑤ Sure. What time should I do that?



3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I don’t have a computer.
② Right,  I’ll  call  you  when I’m done.
③ Yeah,  I  saved  it  in  my  cell phone.
④ Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
⑤ Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.



4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 여자의 집의 위치를 고르시오.






5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
② 과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③ 얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
④ 과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
⑤ 과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고

6. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 심포니의 유래와 역사
② Mozart 음악의 독창성
③ Mozart의 삶에 대한 재조명
④ 고전 음악과 현대 음악의 차이점
⑤ Mozart 음악이 정서에 미치는 효과

7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 양초를 만드는 절차	② 등산 시 유의할 사항
③ 적절한 휴식의 필요성	④ 취미 생활을 하는 이유
⑤ 스트레스의 다양한 요인

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
② 텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
③ 가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다.
④ 지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
⑤ 채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다.

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 상담 교사 － 학생	② 여행사 직원 － 여행객
③ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인	④ 동물원 사육사 － 관람객
⑤ 국립공원 직원 － 탐방객

10. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


















이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	영어 영역(A 형)


11. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 마중 나가기	② 쿠키 사다 주기
③ 도시락 주문하기	④ 교통사고 신고하기
⑤ 사무실에 데려다 주기


12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 책 고르기	② 우산 고쳐 주기
③ 날씨 확인하기	④ 우편엽서 사 오기
⑤ 항공편 예약하기


13. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 언급한 도서관 이용의 문제점을 고르시오.
① 주차장 공사 소음	② 어두운 조명 시설
③ 부족한 편의 시설	④ 좁은 열람실 공간
⑤ 느린 인터넷 속도


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서
② 친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③ 부모님이 허락하지 않아서
④ 방학 숙제를 해야 해서
⑤ 제주도에 가야 해서


15. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $25	② $30	③ $35	④ $40	⑤ $45


16. 장학금에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
② 면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다.
③ 개인별로 학기당 $1,000가 지급된다.
④ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
⑤ 3명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.


17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을 고르시오.




①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 
대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
② It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
③ I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
④ I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
⑤ Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.


19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① You  should  fill  out  the  form first.
② But  practice  will  make  you better.
③ Right, standing is good for your back.
④ I’m sorry, but I can’t go to the concert.
⑤ Okay, I’ll try to get two front-row seats.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Julia가 Samuel에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julia: Samuel,   	
① could you give me a ride home?
② would you teach me how to park?
③ when did you get your driver’s license?
④ what happened after you parked your car?
⑤ how many times did you take the road test?




[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 강사 채용을 공고하려고
② 개정된 학교 규칙을 설명하려고
③ 개설 교과목 내용을 소개하려고
④ 학교 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고
⑤ 학습 도우미 프로그램을 홍보하려고


22. 과목으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 역사	② 생물	③ 지리	④ 수학	⑤ 화학




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(A 형)	3

23. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?



Dear Mayor Johnson:

I’m a long-time resident of Pinewood, and I’m really concerned about the traffic problem in my neighborhood. The traffic has been increasing for the past three years, and I’ve seen many near-accidents. I feel the intersection at Burton Road and 3rd Street is very dangerous because there aren’t any traffic lights. The city should consider installing traffic lights as soon as possible. I believe that this issue affects the safety of every driver or pedestrian who uses that intersection, so it deserves immediate attention. Nothing is as important as our citizens’ safety, so fixing this issue should be made a top priority.
I would appreciate your sincere consideration. Best regards,
Laura McPherson

25. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　What do you think can make you a good tennis player? Suppose there are two different tennis pros giving you tennis lessons. The first pro says things like “good shot” and “good swing” all the time to encourage you. The second one says “good swing” only when you make a good swing. If just hearing “good swing” gives you a reward, then you will prefer the first instructor. But if what you want is to get better at tennis, you will prefer the second instructor. That’s  because  the second instructor’s feedback to you is much more informative than the first one’s. You’re not after “good swing” rewards; you’re after a better tennis game. So feedback that simply makes you feel great will not help you develop tennis skills in the long run.
① 프로와 아마추어 선수 간의 기술적 차이점
② 테니스 실력 향상을 위한 효과적인 피드백
③ 테니스가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
④ 운동 시설과 경기력의 관련성
⑤ 테니스의 올바른 스윙 자세



① 교통사고 후유증의 심각성을 알리려고
② 교차로에 신호등 설치를 요청하려고
③ 교통 법규 위반 차량을 신고하려고
④ 무단 횡단의 위험성을 강조하려고
⑤ 자동차 보험 가입을 권유하려고






24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Everyone would like to assume that  their  wonderful, creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of  their ideas. This selling is part of the practical aspect of creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form of government, they should explain why it is better than the existing form of government.
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다.
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다.
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다.
26. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In much of Europe, many businesses close during the month of August when people go on vacation. Most Europeans believe this is time that they should spend with family or engaging in personal activities. The French, in particular,  value their vacation time and prefer not to work  overtime. They enjoy the longest vacations of any country in the world; French law states that employees must receive a minimum of five weeks of vacation a year. German companies appear to be moving in this direction as well. Despite the extended free time, people of both France and Germany are very productive when they work. To Europeans, their vacation time seems valuable.
① No Work, No Vacation!
② Keys to Keeping Your Job
③ Various Festivals in Europe
④ Vacation Matters to Europeans!
⑤ Europe: Most Popular Vacation Site




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	영어 영역(A 형)


27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　When you have ideas you like, you often think  everyone else should feel the same way. If they don’t, it very often
① becomes a matter of “they just don’t understand!” If a colleague around you doesn’t understand your idea, or its potential, you are ② being given an important message. Maybe your view of a problem ③ that you think you are solving is not shared by other coworkers? If your colleague cannot see it, your consumers may not ④ either. Think about it. Make constant efforts until everyone you explain your idea to understands it. This is all to do with ⑤ find simple  solutions to our daily communication problems.














28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　England’s plan to establish colonies in North America, starting  in  the  late  sixteenth  century,  was  founded  on a
(A) false / valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia, the region of the North American  continent  to  which  England laid claim, would have the same climate as the Mediterranean region of Europe, since it lay at similar latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American colonies, once established, would be able to supply Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s
29. 
Laketown Sports Camp 2013에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


Laketown Sports Camp 2013
June 24th - August 23rd
(Monday - Friday, 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.)











The city of Laketown offers a sports camp for all children seven and older.
?Campers take swimming lessons every afternoon.
?Our weekly activities include basketball, soccer, tennis, badminton, and much more.
?Campers have the option to bring their own lunch from home or purchase lunch from the snack bar.

Registration Information
Period
May 27th － June 7th
Fee
$125 for a week (insurance fee included)
For more information, visit www.laketowncamp.com or call (310) 555-2211.

① 참가자의 연령 제한이 없다.
② 참가자는 매일 오전에 수영 강습을 받는다.
③ 점심은 캠프에서 무료로 제공한다.
④ 등록 기간은 5월 말까지이다.

(B)

on imports from continental Europe.

⑤ 보험료는 등록비에 포함되어 있다.

One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant / scarce timber would do away with the need to import wood from Scandinavia. In  short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty that would quickly turn a profit.
* latitude: 위도 ** prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서

(A) (B)	(C)
① false …… dependence …… abundant
② false …… dependence …… scarce
③ false …… restriction …… abundant
④ valid …… restriction …… scarce
⑤ valid …… restriction …… abundant


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(A 형)	5

30. Wilson High School Library에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


Wilson High School Library
We are very happy to announce that our library has been selected as one of the top 10 libraries in the nation this year.

Hours
Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. － 8:00 p.m. Closed on weekends and holidays

Check-out and Return Policy
Each person is allowed to check out up to 5 books at a time. Books must be returned within 2 weeks from the check-out date.

Special Events
?Meet the Author (June 14th)
- Come and meet Janet Oxford, the author of the bestseller The Treasure of the Desert.
?Book Sale (June 21st)
- All new books will be 20% off, and all used books will be 50% off.










① 올해 10대 우수 도서관으로 선정되었다.
② 주말과 공휴일에는 도서관을 열지 않는다.
③ 대출 도서는 2주 내에 반납해야 한다.
④ 베스트셀러 작가와의 만남이 6월에 있다.
⑤ 도서 판매 행사에서 새 책은 할인받을 수 없다.
31. 
Monthly Observatory Nights에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


Monthly Observatory Nights











We offer a free educational program, “Observatory Nights,” on the third Thursday of every month. It features a lecture and telescopic observing from the observatory roof.
?Admission and parking are free.
?The lectures are intended for high school students.
?Seating is limited and available on a first-come basis.
?Doors open at 5:00 p.m.; the program begins at 8:00 p.m.
?If it is rainy on the day of the event, the program will be canceled.
For more information, call the Education Affairs Office at (617) 555-2176.


① 매달 셋째 목요일에 제공되는 프로그램이다.
② 입장료와 주차료는 무료이다.
③ 강연회는 고등학생 대상이다.
④ 프로그램은 오후 5시에 시작된다.
⑤ 행사 당일에 비가 오면 프로그램이 취소된다.






















이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	영어 영역(A 형)


32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　The above graph shows the comparison between the allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at Triton Ventures in 2012. ① The Customer Service department was allocated 60,000 dollars, which was greater than the amount allocated to any other department. ② On the other hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments   that spent the most were Marketing and Development. ③ The Customer Service and Information Technology departments spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars.
④ The actual spending by the Administration department was less than half the allocated budget. ⑤ The Sales department showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its actual spending among the six departments.










33. 다음 글에 드러난 Tom의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
　As Tom stood on stage at the school play, he could feel the watchful eyes of the audience. Being in the spotlight made him feel tense. He tried to deliver his lines as best as he could, but he could feel his voice shaking. Suddenly, he realized he had missed a sentence. Without going back, he went on as though nothing had happened. But by the time he finished, his hands felt sweaty and his heart was racing. No one commented on his mistake ― apart from his drama teacher. “Well done,” the teacher said. “Acting is like learning to ride a bike. You may not get it perfect the first time. You may fall off a few times, yet each time you get back on you do it better. Your performance may not have been perfect, but it was great.” His teacher’s comforting words brought a smile to Tom’s face.

① bored → excited	② nervous → relieved
③ delighted → regretful	④ curious → disappointed
⑤ envious → embarrassed

[34～36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. It is known that people are extremely limited in the amount of information that they can process at any given time. A common metaphor in early theories of attention is the concept of a bottleneck. This metaphor is especially appealing because it matches our understanding about attention. The narrow neck of a bottle restricts the flow into or out of the bottle. This kind of flow in the narrow passageway is similar to the way people process information. In other words, this bottleneck limits the of information to which we can pay attention.
Thus, when one message is currently flowing through a bottleneck, the other messages must be left behind. [3점]
* metaphor: 은유
① value	② sources	③ quantity
④ reliability	⑤ familiarity

35. Many people have pointed out that personal responsibility can often be	. Consider how often you’ve passed someone who is pulled over on the side of the road with car trouble. It is easy to justify your failure to help by telling yourself someone else will stop. Corporations add another layer of complication to the story of reduced personal responsibility in group settings because corporations are set up to assign legal responsibility to the corporation itself instead of to its members. There are other complex organizations in which the individual members are often not sure of their impact
or power to bring about change. In this kind of culture, “someone else will do it” is a common excuse. [3점]
① lost in groups	② easily recognized
③ decreased by stress	④ strengthened by law
⑤ shaped at an early age

36. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of food, and first impressions are important. No matter how appealing the taste, an unattractive appearance is hard to overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses. The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that messages received from other senses are often ignored if they conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be lemon-flavored, and if it is grape-flavored, many people
 	. Strawberry ice cream tinted with red food coloring seems to have a stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food coloring, even when there is no real difference. [3점]
① cannot correctly identify the flavor
② will not favor the grape-flavored candy
③ can clearly sense the difference in flavor
④ will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor
⑤ will enjoy the subtle difference between them




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(A 형)	7

37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When plants were first grouped together, it was merely for convenience. Even today, plants may be categorized together  in unnatural groupings in order to make them easier to  identify.    (A)     ,   some   wildflower   books   arrange together all white-flowered species or all yellow-flowered species. However, such groupings do not reflect natural relationships and make it difficult to recognize family characteristics. We  don’t infer that all persons with red hair  are more closely related to each other than they are to those with dark hair; likewise, all long-haired dogs are not more closely related to each other than they are to  short-haired  dogs. Modern botanists,    (B)    , try to group plants    according to their natural relationships.
* botanist: 식물학자

(A) (B)
39. 
글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? [3점]


　Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to read, he seemed to get bored and restless. ( ① ) He soon realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was a kinesthetic learner. ( ② ) Once he figured this out,  he  started to use this information to his advantage. ( ③ ) He would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters, and doodles. ( ④ ) He would act out things and work with other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ⑤ ) This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also went up.

* kinesthetic: 운동 감각의









40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?




38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　People believe that “good books” are educational and useful to academic success. However, it appears that the nature of written language itself helps increase academic achievement, regardless of a book’s quality. ① Even books that  provide only pleasure will increase the confidence of students and encourage them to try to read more technical materials in school. ② Comics, magazines, audiobooks, and topics of interest on the Internet are sometimes not considered “real” reading materials. ③ Students should try to guess the meaning of new words while they read rather than look them up in the dictionary. ④ However, these materials let students enjoy the pleasure of reading and gain information, literacy skills, and more. ⑤ This “light” reading is actually very beneficial because it is effortless reading, which improves reading fluency.




(A) Wash the lemons you’ve prepared and cut them in half. Then, squeeze out as much juice as you can into a bowl. You can squeeze the lemons by hand, but it’s easier if you use a lemon squeezer.
(B) Then simply mix together the lemon juice, sugar, and water in a jug, and stir. Pour it into a glass, add some ice, and enjoy your lemonade!
(C) Prepare four lemons, 100g of sugar, one liter of water,   and some ice. You also need a bowl, a jug, and a spoon. Don’t forget to prepare a cutting board and a knife.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	영어 영역(A 형)


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)



(C)
　On the other hand, Zach’s conscience whispered that a true victory comes from fair competition. After a long conflict,
(c) he finally decided to be honest. He told Tony about the suit, and they both joined the race wearing the suits. Tony  won the race, and Zach congratulated him. This was the sweetest second place Zach had ever won.









41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why Do People Shop Online?
② War Against Internet Addiction
③ We Need Guides on the Internet
④ How to Build Your Own Website
⑤ Cyber Space: Creating a New Identity


42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① given the right to vote
② offered an online course
③ provided with more books
④ allowed to use their real names
⑤ protected from corrupt knowledge




[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
(D) 

　Nothing was decided during the morning, but shortly  before the race, the coach told Zach that (d) he and Tony could wear the suit. He asked Zach to tell Tony about  it.  After hearing what his coach said, Zach faced a difficult choice. At first, he hesitated to tell (e) his friend about the news. He thought that if he did not tell Tony about it, he would definitely win the race.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)


44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)


45. 윗글의 Zach에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 100미터 자유형 결승전에 진출했다.
② Tony를 가장 큰 경쟁자로 생각했다.
③ 특수 제작된 수영복을 샀다.
④ Tony의 준우승을 축하해 주었다.
⑤ 코치의 말을 듣고 어려운 선택에 직면했다.







이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2013학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역(A형)

제 3 교시	
5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.







1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m almost ready.
② I’ll see you at 3 p.m.
③ I wrote about camping.
④ We went there by train.
⑤ We should meet at school.

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’ll take a rain check.

① 수습기자를 모집하려고
② 신문 구독을 권장하려고
③ 축하의 글을 공모하려고
④ 잡지 창간을 홍보하려고
⑤ 기념식 참가를 독려하려고


6. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

① 평소에 일찍 일어나야 한다.
② 뇌에 좋은 운동을 해야 한다.
③ 밤에는 불을 끄고 자야 한다.
④ 두통에 좋은 차를 마셔야 한다.
⑤ 침대를 깔끔하게 정리해야 한다.


7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

② It’s definitely not in there.
③ You bought it here last time.
④ You can find it on the Internet.
⑤ I’m looking forward to seeing you.

① 과일과 채소의 차이점
③ 신품종 과일의 우수성
⑤ 열대식물을 기르는 방법

② 식물과 동물의 공통점
④ 일일 채소 섭취 권장량

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한

것을 고르시오.

① It’s Korean barbecue.
② My brother can’t cook.
③ No. I haven’t visited it.

① 청결한 두피 관리 요령
③ 유리컵을 깨끗이 닦는 법
⑤ 페인트 붓의 다양한 종류

② 청소 시 환기의 필요성
④ 요리에 양념을 넣는 순서

④ Sure. You can have some.
⑤ Right. It was last Saturday.

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.


4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 학생회관의 위치를 고르시오.

① 시청
④ 서점

② 은행
⑤ 편의점

③ 학교


10. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




영어 영역(A형)

11. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

18. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]

① 포스터 붙여주기
③ 기차표 예매하기
⑤ 생일상 차려주기

② 캠페인 계획하기
④ 여행지 추천하기


Man:  	

① We’re the last passengers.

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 요청한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

② I think taking a ferry is safe.
③ Then, buy some more books.
④ You should not cut in the line.

① 집 그림 그려주기
③ 과제물 제출해주기
⑤ 디자인 잡지 빌려 주기

② 미술실 청소해주기
④ 영화표 예매해주기

⑤ Okay, put them in my backpack.


19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 언급한 사무실의 문제점을 고르시오.


Woman:  	

① 작은 크기
③ 외부 소음
⑤ 어두운 실내

② 비싼 가격
④ 낙후된 시설


① He’s not a good singer.
② Sure, let’s go together.
③ I saw the game already.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 세미나에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.

① 수업에 출석해야 해서
② 가족 모임에 가야 해서
③ 몸 상태가 좋지 않아서
④ 교수님과 약속이 있어서
⑤ 봉사활동을 신청해야 해서

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.

④ Right, it was a big match.
⑤ Yeah, he loves sunny days.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 남자에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jane: Excuse me, but  	

① are you going to get in?

① $30

② $50

③ $60

④ $80

⑤ $100

② is this going up or down?
③ am I late for the meeting?

16. Christine Book Event에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 5월 4일부터 10일까지 진행된다.
② Joe Christine의 책을 반값으로 판매한다.
③ 작가의 서명을 직접 받을 수 있는 기회가 있다.
④ 판매 수익은 어린이 박물관 건립에 사용된다.
⑤ 보다 많은 정보를 홈페이지에서 찾을 수 있다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 스마트폰 케이스를 고르시오.

④ could you press the button?
⑤ would you move in a little bit?


[21~22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

21. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 축제를 홍보하려고
② 개교를 축하하려고
③ 입학식을 안내하려고
④ 운동부를 소개하려고
⑤ 공사계획을 알려주려고


22. 다음 체육관 시설 중 언급되지 않은 것은?



① 방송실
①	④ 체력단련실
②
③
④
⑤

② 무용실
⑤ 샤워실

③ 회의실


	


영어 영역(A형)

23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?

 So many problems can be avoided by slowing down and carefully considering how to proceed in any given situation. In some instances, of course, there isn’t time to slow down and we have to just react. But generally we have more time than we allot ourselves to make decisions and draw conclusions. Slowing down provides time to consider how an issue has been framed and whether we have really considered all the relevant factors. We ought to pause for a moment in order to reconsider actions that could have serious consequences. Putting on the mental brakes can stop you, for example, from reacting in anger to someone on the road ― a situation that can lead to danger. If more of us would take just a couple extra moments to think an action through, we would all be much better off.

① 타인의 충고에 귀를 기울여라.
② 한 번에 한 가지 일에만 집중하라.
③ 현재의 주어진 상황에서 최선을 다하라.
④ 역경에 굴복하지 말고 도약의 기회로 삼아라.
⑤ 행동하기 전에 여유를 갖고 생각할 시간을 가져라.

25. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

 Studies have revealed that, in general, the people who get hired are those who mix speaking and listening fifty-fifty in the interview. That is, half the time they let the employer do the talking, half the time they do the talking. People who didn’t follow that mix were the ones who didn’t get hired, according to the studies. I think that if you talk too much about yourself, you may seem like a person who would ignore the needs of the organization; if you talk too little, you may seem like a person trying to hide something about your background. So during the interview, be determined to observe the fifty-fifty rule.

① 면접관의 질문에 창의적으로 답변을 해야 한다.
② 합의에 의해 도출된 조직의 결정은 존중되어야 한다.
③ 구직자는 사회 변화에 맞추어 취업 준비를 해야 한다.
④ 구직 면접 시 말하기와 듣기의 비율을 같게 해야 한다.
⑤ 업무효율을 높이려면 의사결정 과정이 단순해야 한다.



24. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?








                                           26. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

 When you organize a party, a seminar, a family party, or whatever, make sure you don’t just get the people who already know each other clustering together. If you invite people to a meal, you can use place cards to facilitate successful networking. Organize games so that people sitting at each table can mix. When you announce, “The buffet is open,” address the subject openly by saying, “Take this opportunity to get to know new people.” A lot of people find this an effective icebreaker to be able to start speaking to others. Don’t be afraid of issuing name badges at large gatherings if people don’t know each other. Get each person to write something typical but a bit mysterious on the badge. That is a nice way of making it possible for people to start a conversation with people they don’t know.


① 주차 시설 이용 절차를 안내하려고
② 고객 서비스 개선 방안을 제안하려고
③ 식료품 배달 시간 연장을 요청하려고
④ 매장 근무에 적합한 직원을 추천하려고
⑤ 상점 직원의 친절한 행동을 칭찬하려고

① 상대방에게 호감을 줄 수 있는 성격 유형
② 사고력 신장을 위한 다양한 경험의 필요성
③ 음식의 종류가 행사의 분위기에 미치는 영향
④ 사교 모임에 초대를 받았을 때 지켜야 하는 기본예절
⑤ 모임 참가자들이 새로운 관계를 맺도록 해 주는 방법


	


영어 영역(A형)

27. Koala Sanctuary에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
28. 
Group Ticket 구매에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?





Group Ticket Inform ation


If you w ant to walk w ith lovely animals native
to Au stralia, visit N O W ! You w on’t leave dis appointed !

? Koala Hugs
We have around 130 adult koalas and baby koalas. Cuddle a koala and have your photo taken any time of the day.







? Australian Wildlife
This beautiful setting is home to a large variety of native Australian wildlife ― you can even feed the kangaroos.

? Exciting Boat Cruise
You can take a boat cruise to our sanctuary past one of Australia’s largest bat colonies! The boat cruise departs at 10am daily from Queensland Cultural Centre.

Group tickets for the 2013 basketball season are on sale now!

Benefits
In addition to a great night of basketball, your group will also receive:
· Your group’s name shown on the jumbo screen!
· Reserved seating in the best location
· Free coupons for snacks and beverages

Payment
· Ticket prices vary depending on the game ($450~$1,500). Please check the details on our web site. (www.grouptickets.com)
· Full payment is due one month prior to your scheduled game.
· You may pay by credit card, check card, or cash.

Additional Information
· You can reserve group tickets just by calling the Group Sales Office. (☎ 123-4567)
· Once full payment is made, the tickets will be delivered to you by mail.

? Hours & Prices
- Open 7 days a week (Closed on public holidays)





- Child $20, Student $25, Adult $30

For more details phone 3378 1366

① 대형 스크린에 티켓을 구매한 단체의 이름이 표시된다.
② 가장 좋은 위치의 좌석 예약이 가능하다.
③ 세부적인 가격 정보는 홈페이지를 통해 확인할 수 있다.
④ 관람 예정 경기 일주일 전까지 티켓 금액을 완납해야 한다.
⑤ 전화를 통한 티켓 예매가 가능하다.




*sanctuary: 자연보호구역

① 코알라와 사진을 찍는 시간은 오전으로 제한된다.
② 캥거루에게 먹이를 주는 행위는 금지되어 있다.
③ 배를 타고 오는 도중에 박쥐 서식지를 지난다.
④ 주말에는 평일 보다 한 시간 일찍 개장한다.
⑤ 성인은 학생 요금의 두 배를 지불해야 한다.



영어 영역(A형)
29. Poetry Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?	30. 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? [3점]













 The graph above shows the results of a survey on how names are perceived by the general population using scores that range from zero to 100. ① In terms of giving the impression of being ethical, the name Barbara receives the highest score among all the names shown in the graph. ② The name Mike makes less of an impression of being ethical than does the name Tom. ③ When it comes to being popular, the name Leonard receives the lowest rating. ④ The name Courtney makes twice as much of an impression of being popular as does the name Alexandra. ⑤ All the names mentioned above receive scores of higher than 50 in the area of being successful.





31. (A) ~ (C)에서 어법에 맞는 표현을 바르게 짝지은 것은? [3점]









① 노래가사로도 응모가 가능하다.
② 응모작에 응모자와 부모가 서명을 해야 한다.
③ 응모작은 우편으로 보내야 한다.
④ 당선작은 2013년 6월호에 실릴 것이다.
⑤ 응모자의 사진을 함께 제출해야 한다.

One of the greatest ways to cultivate a possibility mind-set
(A) is / are to prompt yourself to dream one size bigger than you normally do. Let’s face it: Most people dream too small. They don’t think big enough. Henry Curtis advises, “Make your plans as fantastic as you like (B) because / because of twenty-five years from now, they will not seem so special. Make your plans ten times as great as you first planned, and twenty-five years from now you will wonder why you did not make them fifty times as great.” If you push yourself to dream more expansively and to make your goals at least a step beyond what makes you (C) comfortable / comfortably , you will be forced to grow. And it will set you up to believe in greater possibilities.

(A) (B)	(C)
① is   …… because    …… comfortable
② is  …… because of …… comfortably
③ is   …… because    …… comfortably
④ are  …… because   …… comfortable
⑤ are …… because of …… comfortably


	


영어 영역(A형)

32. 다음 글에 드러난 Violet의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?

 Violet sat back, looked out the window, and watched the wind softly blow the trees as she nodded off. She awoke to the sound of a faint but promising whisper from the hospital bed. She looked at Joseph and saw his lips move ever so slightly. Violet knew what she had seen and gasped in delight. “Joseph?” she dared to breathe his name expectantly. Again she heard a sound and saw his lips move. Violet jumped to her feet. “I hear you, Joseph! I hear you! Do it again! I hear you! Do it again! I know you can do it!” By now she had lowered the rail on his bed and was leaning over so she could see his lips and hear his voice. The sound came louder and stronger.

① calm
② bored
③ hopeful
④ horrified
⑤ depressed

34. Our health is certainly a matter of how we feel, but it is a lot more besides. We must always factor in 	. An individual may feel fine, but if significant others in his or her community keep saying things like, “You don’t seem like yourself,” or “Is there something wrong?” that person may feel impelled to go to the doctor to get checked out. The doctor, in turn, may perform various tests that indicate that there is, indeed, something wrong even if the person is as yet experiencing no overt symptoms. Once the doctor has confirmed one’s friends’ evaluation that something is wrong, the person is very likely to start feeling a lot less lively. [3점]
① what the people around us think
② how doctors react to our thoughts
③ the clear symptoms we often have
④ results of regular medical checkups
⑤ when others feel they are unhealthy




















[33~35] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

33. A ratio is a way of expressing the relationship between one number and another. If there is one teacher to fifty students, the teacher/student ratio is one to fifty, and the student/teacher ratio is fifty to one. If a very wealthy prince were being tutored by fifty teachers, the teacher/student ratio would be fifty to one, and the student/teacher ratio would be one to fifty. As you can  see, the	in which the numbers are compared is important. That is, if the arrangement of the two items, teacher and student, changes, the ratio of the items will change, too.
35. 
Many of us spend time finding faults in the people we deal with in our lives. If, instead, we try to search their character for what we like about them, we’ll like them more; and, as a result, they’ll like us more. My friend had a very difficult relationship with her boss. Worse still, she truly disliked him as a person. One day, however, she decided to 	. Even though her manager was not a kind person in the office, he was a very devoted family man. After focusing on this quality, a little at a time, she started to like him gradually. One day, she told him honestly that she admired how family-oriented he was. Surprisingly the next day, he was in her office, giving her some information that was very useful to her. [3점]

① acknowledge his strengths
② convince him to work harder
③ point out his wrong behaviors

① time
④ height

② order
⑤ movement

③ speed

④ force him to endure the conditions
⑤ make a complaint about her company


	


영어 영역(A형)

36. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
 Pay is most carefully considered when a person is applying for a job and considering an offer. In general, people ① accept offers where the monetary compensation is near the amount that they were hoping for. Over time, employees often expect to receive raises and/or bonuses, but these factors are not just about ② money. Employees want to be compensated fairly for their work. If they are taking on a heavier workload with more difficult projects, it is likely they would expect ③ inadequate compensation for their efforts. Part of this compensation could be monetary, but often times ④ recognition is just as important. People love to hear they have done a good job. A ⑤ promotion that includes a title change can be just as meaningful, if not more meaningful than an increase in salary.

















37. 다음 글의 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

 Most people who work are used to setting and pursuing performance goals. Most workers will give you a blank stare if you ask what their learning goals are, or they will offer up a performance goal in disguise.   (A)   , “I would like to learn to make more money,” and “I would like to learn to break eighty in golf,” are simply performance goals with the word learning inserted. How does a learning goal differ from a performance goal? Performance is something you do that brings about an observable change in the external world. Learning,    (B)      , is a change that takes place within the learner, although often as a result of interaction with the external world. Thus a change in understanding based on new information or on a new interpretation of old information would be classified as learning.

(A) (B)
① However	…… in fact
② However	…… as a result
38. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?

 A roof that is completely or partially covered with vegetation and soil is known as a green roof. ① In urban areas, green roofs provide wildlife habitat, even on the tops of tall buildings. ② A city with multiple green roofs provides “stepping stones” of habitat that enable migrating birds and insects to pass unharmed through the city. ③ Green roofs can also be used to grow vegetable and fruit crops or to provide an outdoor refuge for people living or working in the building. ④ Moreover, it is difficult to grow plants because heating costs in winter and cooling costs in summer increase. ⑤ Green roofs allow urban systems to more closely resemble the natural systems they have replaced.

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
[3점]


 For most athletes, maximum speed is reached between 40-60m. Once this is achieved, the challenge is to hold this speed for as long as possible. ( ① ) Young athletes may run with the belief that they will run faster and faster until they reach the finishing line. ( ② ) After 60m, all sprinters start to slow down. ( ③ ) At both maximum speed and decelerating speed, the challenge for the runner is to maintain their technique as long as possible. ( ④ ) Vigorous arm actions, powerful extensions of the rear leg, and applying sprinting forces through the ball of the foot will all help to hold the speed as long as possible. ( ⑤ ) Some people observe that great sprinters start to pull away from other runners toward the finishing line ― this is because these athletes are not slowing down as fast as their opponents.

40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

 It is not that difficult to make an ant farm. You need a large glass jar, a soda can, a sponge, some dirt, ants, fabric, and black paper. Place the soda can in the center of the jar as a first step.
(A) You can slide the paper off to observe the ants. It may take a while before you see tunnels. Don’t forget to feed the ants some crumbs every few days!
(B) Fill the space between the can and the jar with lightly packed dirt, and put a piece of moist sponge on top of the can. Keep the sponge moist by pouring a little water on it from time to time.
(C) Then, put the ants on the dirt. Cover the top of the jar with fabric and secure it tightly with a rubber band so the ants can’t escape. Wrap the black paper around the jar and tape them together.

③ Moreover	…… instead
④ For example …… in the same way
⑤ For example …… on the other hand

① (A)-(B)-(C)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

② (B)-(A)-(C)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)


	






[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

영어 영역(A형)





(B)




(C)

(D) 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① Ways of Preventing School Bullying
② Fair Play: The True Spirit of Sports
③ Too Many Mentors, Too Much Trouble
④ Tor-mentor: A New Source of Motivation
⑤ Team Building through Physical Challenges


43. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

① (B)-(C)-(D)
③ (C)-(B)-(D)

② (B)-(D)-(C)
④ (C)-(D)-(B)

① ruin
④ elevate

② copy
⑤ simplify

③ delay

⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)


44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?


① (a)


② (b)


③ (c)


④ (d)


⑤ (e)




[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(A)

 The Memorial Day march came to an end. The old veteran’s body ached from marching, and he began to look for a place to rest his tired feet. He made his way to a park bench, sat down, and lowered his head. A young boy passing by saw
(a) him, approached, and said, “Please sir, do you mind if I ask you what the medals you wear are for? Did you get them for being a war hero?”
45. 
위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 퇴역 군인은 Memorial Day 행진에 참가했다.
② 소년은 퇴역 군인의 훈장에 관해 물어 보았다.
③ 퇴역 군인은 소년에게 자신의 훈장을 주었다.
④ 소년은 벤치에 앉으라는 퇴역 군인의 말에 응했다.
⑤ 소년은 퇴역 군인과 헤어진 후에도 자주 만났다.


	
2013학년도 3월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역(A형)	1

5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 역사 학습용 게임을 홍보하려고
② 강의의 개요와 목적을 설명하려고

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I like rainy days a lot.
② My umbrella is too old.
③ I won’t forget to bring it back.
④ I left my umbrella in the subway.
⑤ The weatherman said it would rain.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① That’s great. I’ll pay you later.
② No, thanks. I already bought it.
③ Sure, what about going there together?
④ The shopping mall is closed today.
⑤ Sorry, but could you return it?




3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Try this cereal with milk.
② Wash the dishes after breakfast.
③ You should drink milk every day.
④ You can have toast and apple juice.
⑤ Put the milk back in the refrigerator.




4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 쓰레기장의 위치를 고르시오.

③ 시험 준비 요령에 관해 조언하려고
④ 역사 유적 탐방 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 온라인 게임의 역사 왜곡에 대해 항의하려고

6. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 사용하지 않는 전기 코드를 뽑아야 한다.
② 화재 시 대처 요령을 숙지해야 한다.
③ 전자파 차단 장치를 설치해야 한다.
④ 절전형 가전제품을 사용해야 한다.
⑤ 집 안에 소화 장비를 갖춰야 한다.

7. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 대나무의 다양한 용도
② 판다의 수가 줄어드는 원인
③ 무분별한 삼림 개발의 위험성
④ 영화가 판다의 이미지에 미친 영향
⑤ 대나무 숲이 휴식 공간으로 인기 있는 이유

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 기숙사 생활 예절	② 기숙사 생활의 단점
③ 기숙사비 인하의 필요성	④ 통학 시간을 절약하는 방법
⑤ 가족과 함께 하는 식사의 중요성

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 팬 - 체조 선수	② 영화감독 - 배우
③ 강습생 - 수영 강사	④ 리포터 - 구조 요원
⑤ 사진 기자 - 수영 선수

10. 대화를  듣고,  포스터  디자인에서  남자가  수정할  부분을  고르 시오.





2	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 학생 상담 센터 소개해 주기
② 안전 교육 자료 제작해 주기
③ 초등학교 소방 훈련 도와주기
④ 일일 교사 프로그램 참가하기
⑤ 소방서 견학 안내 책자 보내 주기

12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청소 도와주기	② 간식 가져오기
③ 종이 사다 주기	④ 프린터 고쳐주기
⑤ 과학 공책 빌려주기

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 언급한 여행 가방의 문제점을 고르시오.
① 지퍼 고장	② 내부 훼손
③ 바퀴 불량	④ 색상 변질
⑤ 손잡이 파손

14. 대화를  듣고,  남자가  야구  경기를  보러  갈  수  없는  이유를 고르시오.
① 미술 과제를 끝내지 못해서
② 가족사진을 찾으러 가야 해서
③ 비디오카메라를 빌리러 가야 해서
④ 할머니 생신잔치 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 야구 경기 관람권을 구하지 못해서

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 결제할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 16	② $ 18	③ $ 20	④ $ 22	⑤ $ 24

16. Young  Inventors’  Camp에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고,  일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 4월 첫째 주에 개최된다.
② 팀별로 발명품을 제작한다.
③ 우승팀은 국제 발명가 회의에 참석할 수 있다.
④ 유명 발명가의 초청 강연이 있다.
⑤ 전년도 참가자에게는 참가 우선권이 주어진다.

17. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  선택한  활동을 고르시오.
Highland National Park Adventures

①
②
③
④
⑤

18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① That’s good. I’d like to come at 5 p.m.
② I see. What time is he going to come back?
③ Is he? How about taking him to the dentist?
④ The dentist will see you now. You can go in.
⑤ Right. I should have brushed my teeth regularly.


19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① You’re lucky to learn from him this year.
② I hope you enjoy teaching at your new school.
③ It’s a pity that such a great teacher left your school.
④ I’m happy that you want to become a math teacher.
⑤ I’m sure he won’t move to another school.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emily가 점원에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Emily:  	
① I already have a similar style.
② I’m looking for a dress like this.
③ I came to pick up the dress I ordered.
④ Will you come to the party next Saturday?
⑤ Can you show me another fashion magazine?





[21 ~ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 회비 납부를 독려하려고
② 회원 가입 절차를 안내하려고
③ 병원 자원 봉사자를 모집하려고
④ 적극적인 연습 참여를 당부하려고
⑤ 자선 공연 일정 변경을 공지하려고


2. 아동 병원에 올해 가져갈 선물로 언급된 것은?
① 책	② 쿠키	③ 인형
④ 퍼즐	⑤ 크레용




	

영어 영역(A형)	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 What would happen if you went to the soil and said, “Give me some fruit. Give me some plants”? The soil would probably respond, “Excuse me, sir, but you’re a little confused. You must be new here. That’s not the way the game is played.” Then it would explain that you should plant the seed. You take care of it. You water it and cultivate the soil. You fertilize it. You protect it and nurture it. Then, if you do it well, you will get your plant or your fruit sometime later. You could ask from the soil forever, but it wouldn’t change things. You have to keep giving, keep nurturing, for the soil to bear fruit ― and life is exactly the same way.
① 분수에 맞게 처신하라.
② 행동하기 전에 상황을 고려하라.
③ 효율적인 작업 방식을 계속 모색하라.
④ 서로에게 도움이 되는 방법을 찾으라.
⑤ 원하는 것을 얻으려면 먼저 노력을 기울이라.




24. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


① 사무기기 교체를 건의하려고
② 미지급된 수당을 요청하려고
③ 근무 시간 연장에 대해 항의하려고
④ 초과근무 수당 인상을 촉구하려고
⑤ 근무 시간 조정 가능 여부를 문의하려고

25. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 A study by Terry A. Hartig, a psychology professor at Uppsala University in Sweden, tested a random group of individuals. He asked them to carry out a forty­minute sequence of tasks designed to exhaust their “directed attention capacity.” He then instructed participants to spend forty minutes either walking in a local nature preserve, walking in an urban area, or sitting quietly while reading magazines and listening to music. He found that after this period those who had walked in the nature preserve performed better than the other participants on a standard proofreading task. He reported that the greater the exposure to outdoor activities in green spaces, the better people were able to focus their attention.
* proofreading: 교정
① 목표가 분명할 때 성취동기가 강해진다.
② 긍정적인 마음가짐이 성공의 바탕이 된다.
③ 자연과의 접촉이 집중력 회복에 도움이 된다.
④ 효과적인 휴식 방법은 사람마다 다를 수 있다.
⑤ 건강을 위해 일과 휴식 사이의 균형이 필요하다.

















26. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Facilities managers should be aware of and take advantage of available resources to help companies meet the challenges of safety issues. Since power failures are rare, for example, it is nearly impossible for people to remember what to do when they occur. So training is needed to keep memory fresh and provide practice so that actions are properly performed. One such remedy is regular training. Some safety topics require more time to finish, but that should not be a limiting factor in learning about ways to keep workers safe. After all, workers are an organization’s most precious assets. Always have regular safety training sessions, usually every year, and practice sessions quarterly.
① 효율적인 고객 관리 요령
② 쾌적한 근로 환경의 중요성
③ 시설 관리자의 다양한 임무
④ 주기적인 안전 훈련의 필요성
⑤ 직원 연수 프로그램의 문제점


	

4	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

27. Parien Day at the Stamford Symphony에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하는 것은?
28. 
Forests for the Future Essay Competition에 관한 다음 안내문의
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?






① 티켓은 정상 가격에서 30달러가 할인된다.
② 구매된 티켓 1매당 학생 1인이 추가로 입장할 수 있다.
③ 공연이 끝난 후에 프로그램에 대한 강연이 있다.
④ 티켓의 주문은 4월 5일부터 받기 시작한다.
⑤ 주문서 양식은 온라인으로 제공된다.

① 에세이 제출 마감일은 4월 15일이다.
② 주어진 주제 중 하나를 선택하여 에세이를 쓴다.
③ 에세이는 750 단어 이내로 작성되어야 한다.
④ 고등학생들에게 참가 자격이 주어진다.
⑤ 모든 수상작이 잡지에 게재된다.




















영어 영역(A형)	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29. 신입생  오리엔테이션에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과  일치하지
않는 것은?


① 신입생에게 학교 교육과정에 대해 안내한다.
② 손님은 오전 10시 30분부터 입장이 가능하다.
③ 행사장에는 냉방장치가 가동되지 않는다.
④ 신입생과 손님은 같은 층에 앉는다.
⑤ 선배 학생들의 공연이 예정되어 있다.




30. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 I was staying at a hotel in Tokyo. I had been a guest for about ten days and was returning to my room in the middle of an afternoon. I took the elevator to my floor. Entering the room, I immediately sensed that something was wrong. Out of place. Different. I was in the wrong room! Someone else’s things were distributed around the head of the bed and the table. My first thoughts were, “What if I am discovered here? How do I explain my presence to a Japanese person who may not even speak English?” I checked my key again. Yes, it really was mine. Clearly they had moved somebody else into my room. But where was my room now? And where were my belongings?
① satisfied	② relaxed	③ envious
④ bored	⑤ puzzled

31. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The above graph shows the change in the population of book readers between 2011 and 2012. ① Overall, the percentage of book readers declined from 78 % in 2011 to 75 % in 2012. ② The percentage of printed book readers in 2012 was smaller than that of printed book readers in 2011.
③ In 2012, the percentage of those who read e­books increased by 7 % compared to the previous year. ④ The ownership of e­book reading devices decreased between 2011 and 2012. ⑤ About one­third of the population owned e­book reading devices in 2012.





32. (A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
 Hairdressers are constantly servicing clients who come in with a picture clipped from a beauty magazine and tell the stylist, “This is the look I want ― cut my hair like this.” A stylist can just do the cut, take the money and (A) tell / telling the customer that she got exactly what she wanted. But a good stylist knows that  what  a customer  thinks she wants
(B) is / to be often not what she really wants. The “look” in that picture will frequently not be the “look” on this particular customer. Good stylists know that their job is not just perfectly executing the cut they were asked for. They know
(C) how / what the face and bone structure and the condition of the hair would change the look in the client’s favorite picture.
(A) (B)	(C)
① tell	is	how
② tell	to be	what
③ tell	is	what
④ telling	to be	how
⑤ telling	is	what


	

6	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

3. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은? [3점]
 Sometimes athletes need to be allowed to practice their skills on their own before they receive feedback. That way they can determine what is working and what isn’t and can become more ① mindful of their strengths and weaknesses. If you attempt to provide assistance when athletes would prefer to practice on their own, you may be ② wasting a lot of time and breath. When athletes realize that their best efforts are producing ③ satisfactory outcomes, they are usually more motivated to hear what you have to say. In other words, athletes are responsive to assistance when they fail to achieve the outcome they were hoping for. A coach’s challenge, then, is to remain patient until these and other types of ④ teachable moments arise. The reward for such ⑤ patience is athletes who are motivated to hear what you have to say and eager to incorporate your suggestions.


[34 ~ 36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. When we are children, our bodies grow automatically. A year goes by, and we become taller, stronger, more capable
of doing new things and facing new challenges. I think many people carry into adulthood a subconscious belief that mental, spiritual, and emotional growth follows a similar pattern. Time goes by, and we simply get better. We’re like Charlie Brown in Charles Schulz’s Peanuts comic strip, who once said, “I think I’ve discovered the secret of life ― you just hang around until you get used to it.” The problem is that  we don’t improve  by simply living. We  have  to  be
 	 about it. Musician Bruce Springsteen commented, “A time comes when you need to stop waiting for the man you want to become and start being the man you want to be.” No one improves by accident. Personal growth doesn’t just happen on its own. [3점]
① content	② defensive	③ intentional
④ thankful	⑤ self­confident


35. Suppose you are attending an NBA basketball game. If everyone is sitting, someone who stands has a superior view.
Spectators usually can see well if everyone sits or if everyone stands. Sitting in seats is more comfortable than standing. When there is no cooperation, everyone stands; each spectator does what is best for himself or herself given the actions of other spectators. If all spectators sit, someone, taking what the others will do as a given, will stand. If all spectators are standing, then it is best to remain standing. With spectator cooperation, the solution is for everyone to sit. The problem is that each spectator may be tempted to get a better view by standing. The cooperative solution needs to be attained ― in this situation, 	.

① some of them stand up
② each cheers his or her team
③ everyone remains seated
④ all know basketball game rules
⑤ people do what they want





36. Can you recall what you bought for your dinner on the same day last month? Probably not. How about this then:
herdsmen of the Swazi tribe of East Africa are able to remember in great detail each cow or bull bought a year ago, including who sold the animal, whether it was a bull, a cow, or a calf, its age and appearance, and what it was bartered for. Impressive, huh? Cattle have tremendous social and economic importance in the Swazi tribe. When the psychologist Barlett tested these same men on other kinds of detail, their memory wasn’t better than the average person’s. The conclusion we can draw from this is that we tend to 	. [3점]
* barter: 물물교환하다
① follow others’ opinions
② stick to what we believe
③ expect our future positively
④ learn better by imitating others
⑤ remember what matters most to us





37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 A goal image is a target set in your mind. It is a clear image of something you commit yourself to achieving. A goal image is what motivates you. Imagine it’s a warm summer day and friends are going to the club to play a round of golf, or to the beach to relax. You, (A) , are  going to the gym to work out. Why? Because you have a picture in mind of being on the Olympic team, and that goal image directs you to the gym and to the training necessary to achieve your goal. (B) , instead of leaving the office  after closing a sale and going to the club to play golf, the account executive turns back to the phone, making the calls necessary to achieve a target she has set for herself.
* account executive: (광고회사의) 영업 담당 임원
(A) (B)
① however	Similarly
② however	In contrast
③ for example	To sum up
④ therefore	In addition
⑤ therefore	Nevertheless


	

영어 영역(A형)	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Seasickness can occur anytime you board a sea vessel and ruin your entire cruise trip. Fortunately, there are effective ways to prevent or relieve it. ① As soon as you feel the beginning effects of seasickness, go to the deck of the ship and stare at the horizon. ② The constant wind and smell of the sea can make seasickness worse. ③ Another step you can take right away is to eat a small meal, such as crackers, some fruit or vegetables. ④ You can also use herbal remedies via taste and smell to relieve seasickness.
⑤ Chamomile or lavender aromatherapy or essential oils have a calming effect and help prevent seasickness.


39. 글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한 곳은? [3점]

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




 I look for lip compression or disappearing lips during interviews or when someone is making a declarative statement. ( ① ) This is such a reliable cue that it will  show up precisely at the moment a difficult question is asked. ( ② ) If you see it, that doesn’t necessarily mean the person is lying. ( ③ ) For example, if I ask someone, “Are you hiding something from me?” and he compresses his lips as I ask the question, he is hiding something. ( ④ ) This is especially accurate if it is the only time he has concealed or compressed his lips during our discussion. ( ⑤ ) It is a signal that I need to push further in questioning this person.

40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A) Now turn the shirt right side out. Begin stuffing it through the neck hole. Making sure you fill the arms, keep going until the entire pillow is full up to the neck opening.
(B) Press the neck down flat, so the opening is closed. Flip the collar up and sew straight across so the hole is closed. Flip the collar back down again, and now you’ve got a cool pillow!
(C) Button the shirt and iron it. Turn it wrong side out, and sew the armholes closed and the bottom of the shirt











41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Early Birds Catch the Worms
② Being There to Guide the Way
③ Learning from Trials and Errors
④ Sharing Values with Your Children
⑤ Cardinals: A Symbol of Good News











42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① led their offspring out


closed.

② fed their babies properly
① (A) - (C) - (B)
② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ taught their offspring to sing
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)
④ cleaned their babies’ feathers
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

⑤ warned their offspring of enemies

	

8	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)












(B)

4. 위 글의 밑줄 친 a reason의 내용으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 약속 지키기의 중요성을 깨닫게 하는 것
② 뜻밖에 생긴 시간에 타인을 돕게 하는 것
③ 여행을 통해 진정한 휴식의 의미를 알게 하는 것
④ 진심 어린 충고로 상대방의 마음을 바꾸게 하는 것
⑤ 어른을 공경하는 마음을 아이들에게 가르치게 하는 것









45. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 수하물 찾는 곳에 갈 필요가 없었다.
② 여자에게 현재 위치가 출발 층임을 알려주었다.
③ 인형을 주인에게 돌려주었다.
④ 화장실에 가기 전에 인형을 가방에 넣었다.
⑤ 늦는다는 친구의 전화를 받았다.





(C)
(D)


43. 주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)
2013학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역(A형)	1

5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 마술 대회 참가를 권유하려고
② 대중교통 생활화를 권장하려고

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I don’t want to learn Spanish.
② The class starts at 7 in the evening.
③ A one­hour class at the community center.
④ For about 2 years since I started high school.
⑤ Yes, I’ve been learning how to write Spanish.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’d like to buy a brown sweater.
② I think pink will look good on you.
③ Green color is popular these days.
④ I’m afraid they’re all out of stock now.
⑤ This skirt would go well with your sweater.




3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I’ll turn it off when I leave home.
② Sure, but not until I finish my homework.
③ Okay, but only after watching this program.
④ Oh, I didn’t realize I fell asleep on the sofa.
⑤ No, I don’t like watching TV before going to bed.




4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 남자가 가려는 식당의 위치를 고르시오.

③ 열차 운행 시간 변경을 알리려고
④ 열차 디자인 아이디어를 공모하려고
⑤ 열차 내 특별 행사에 관해 안내하려고

6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 효율적인 냉장고 청소 방법
② 식품을 냉장고에 보관하는 요령
③ 냉장고 내부 습도 유지의 중요성
④ 식품에 따른 적정 냉장 보관 기간
⑤ 에너지 절약을 위한 냉장고 사용법

7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 숙소 선정 시 고려할 점	② 다양한 숙박 시설의 장단점
③ 여행 경비를 아끼는 요령	④ 안전한 여행을 위한 유의점
⑤ 관광지 정보를 얻는 방법

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 외식을 줄이면 가정 경제에 도움이 된다.
② 작은 그릇을 이용하면 과식을 예방할 수 있다.
③ 가족의 수가 많으면 요리 준비를 분담할 수 있다.
④ 요리의 가짓수를 줄이면 음식물 쓰레기를 줄일 수 있다.
⑤ 음식물 쓰레기 배출에 부과하는 요금을 인상할 필요가 있다.

9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 의사 - 환자	② 영화감독 - 배우
③ 안무가 - 무용수	④ 패션 디자이너 - 모델
⑤ 옷 가게 점원 - 손님

10.대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.


		

2	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

1.대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① 치즈 케이크 사다 주기	② 요리 재료 준비하기
③ 자동차 열쇠 찾아 주기	④ 손님들에게 연락하기
⑤ 제과점 위치 알려 주기

12.대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 함께 병문안 가기	② 꽃다발 주문해 주기
③ 과학 프로젝트 도와주기	④ 배드민턴 경기 응원하러 오기
⑤ 배드민턴 파트너 되어 주기


13.대화를  듣고,  여자가  언급한  자전거  헬멧의  문제점을  고르 시오.
① 버클이 고장 났다.	② 끈이 짧다.
③ 긁힌 자국이 있다.	④ 지나치게 무겁다.
⑤ 크기가 맞지 않다.


14.대화를 듣고,  여자가 권투 시합에 출전하지 않는 이유를 고르 시오.
① 체중 관리에 실패해서	② 훈련 기간이 부족해서
③ 시합 일정이 변경되어서	④ 라이벌이 출전하지 않아서
⑤ 학교 대표로 선발되지 못해서

15.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $70	② $80	③ $90	④ $100	⑤ $110


16.Beaver  County  College  Fair에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고,  일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 10월 24일에 2시간 동안 개최된다.
② 참가비는 무료이나 미리 등록을 해야 한다.
③ 100개가 넘는 학교에서 진학 정보를 제공한다.
④ 모든 연령의 학생들이 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 방문객은 캠퍼스에 도착하면 안내를 받게 된다.


17.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  주문할  텐트를  고 르시오.
Yellow Creek Outdoor Tents


①

②

③

④

⑤

18.대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① She’ll be waiting for you at the train station.
② Yes, you can call her and cancel the meeting.
③ Okay, but make sure you clean your room later.
④ I’ll give you a ride to the airport after I finish cleaning.
⑤ Since you’re done with your job, you can come with me.


19.대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Why don’t you give it to your friend?
② Feed it with fresh vegetables and fruits.
③ You should take good care of your pets.
④ I want you to study more about animals.
⑤ What about buying another rabbit instead?


20.다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  Mark가  Harry에게  할  말로  가장  적 절한 것을 고르시오.
Mark:  	
① I also want to try out for the basketball team.
② I’m afraid the coach is moving to another school.
③ Playing basketball will make you taller and healthier.
④ You played a major role in our team’s winning the game.
⑤ I’m sure you’re the very player our coach is looking for.




[21 ∼ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21.남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 자원봉사 활동 참여를 독려하려고
② 학생회에 대한 지지를 당부하려고
③ 학교 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고
④ 교내 미술 대회 입상자를 알리려고
⑤ 학교 달력에 넣을 그림을 공모하려고


2.학교 활동으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 수학여행	② 체육 대회	③ 퀴즈쇼
④ 축제	⑤ 봉사 활동


	

영어 영역(A형)	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

23.다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

25.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Most universities have students fill out an evaluation of every course they take. The results are often made publicly available and can be a good guide to the best classes. In fact, a large number of studies have shown some of the benefits of these evaluations. In the first place, they are reliable; students tend to agree with each other on which classes are good and even ten years later still rate the same classes highly. They also appear to be correlated with performance; students perform better in classes they rate highly. In one study, two professors taught the same class and gave identical exams; students taught by the professor with higher evaluations performed better on the exam.
① 수행 평가 시행의 장단점
② 학생에 의한 강의 평가의 이점
③ 강의 평가 실시 방법의 문제점
④ 동기 부여와 학업 성취도의 상관관계
⑤ 강의 평가의 공정성을 향상시키는 방법







① 하굣길 교통안전 담당 경찰관의 증원을 요청하려고
② 초등학생 교통안전 교육의 중요성을 강조하려고
③ 새로운 초등학교 설립의 필요성을 알리려고
④ 학교 운영 예산 편성에 대해 보고하려고
⑤ 학교 앞 교통 신호등 설치를 건의하려고




24.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Common wisdom states, “If it tastes good, it’s not good for you.” It also says, “If you get to eat the foods you like, you’re not dieting.” There is no evidence to support these claims. In fact, many diets fail due to this attitude. When dieting, there is no reason that the foods have to taste bad. I knew a bodybuilder who used to mix tuna, water, and protein powder in a blender for lunch. His idea was that food didn’t need to taste good; what really mattered was getting nutrients. That mentality may work for some. But if you tell the majority of people that their food must be dull or that they can’t ever eat what they like, you are setting them up for failure. Flavor in the diet helps to ensure success as long as the flavor is not pushing you over your calorie budget.
① 건강 보조 식품에 지나치게 의존해서는 안 된다.
② 다이어트를 위한 음식이 맛이 없을 필요는 없다.
③ 다이어트 중에도 단백질 섭취를 충분히 해야 한다.
④ 음식을 선택할 때 맛보다 영양을 우선 고려해야 한다.
⑤ 체중 조절을 위해서 운동과 식이요법을 병행해야 한다.


26.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 One spring morning I paused beside a park fountain to watch the spray change the sunlight into beautiful rainbows. A young mother, followed by a tiny blond girl, came hurrying along the path. When the child saw the fountain, she threw her arms wide. “Mommy, wait!” she cried. “See all the pretty colors!” The mother reached for her daughter’s hand. “Come on,” she urged. “We’ll miss our bus!” Then seeing the joy on the small face, she said, “All right, there’ll be another bus soon.” As she knelt with her arms around the child, joy filled the mother’s face too ― that rare and special joy of sharing something lovely with someone we love. Since that day, I’ve found that the happiest children belong to families rich in rainbows shared.
① Share a Joyful Moment with Your Kid
② Be Strict, Get Your Kid to Succeed
③ Don’t Let Your Kid Waste Time
④ Safety First, Pleasure Later
⑤ Keep Promises to Your Kid


	

4	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

27.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Don’t be afraid to move around and try different things,
① however old you are. The most important thing you want to find out is who you are and what capabilities you have. Give yourself a time limit to dig into yourself and find out
② what you need. In this period, there is no way around it, so you have to be a risk taker. If you don’t take any risks, you don’t get any sweetness out of life. And the truth of the matter is that the sweetness in life ③ comes with the risk. I’ve lived my life ④ taking risks and I wish I could tell you they were all successful, but they weren’t. But you want to know something? I learned more from my failures than I ⑤ was from my successes.



















28.(A),  (B),  (C)의  각  네모  안에서  문맥에  맞는  낱말로  가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
When two monkeys are trapped together in a small cage,
29. 
Future Drive Motor Show 2013에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과
일치하는 것은?


FUTURE DRIVE MOTOR SHOW 2013






Future Drive Motor Show is one of the most popular motor shows in the world that has been held annually since 2001.

? Dates: November 9 through November 18
? Hours
- November 9 - 17: 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
- November 18: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
(Box office closes one hour prior to the end of the show each day.)

? Admission
- $12 for adults
- $6 for seniors aged 62 and older
- $6 for children aged 7 - 12
- Free admission for children aged 6 and younger when they are accompanied by a paying parent

? Special Days
- November 12: Women’s Day. Women are admitted

they try everything they can to (A)

a fight.

for $6.

Moving with caution and suppressing any behaviors that could
trigger aggression are good short­term solutions to the problem. The monkeys sit in a corner and avoid any random movements; even a brief touch could be interpreted as the beginning of (B) generous / hostile action. Mutual eye contact is also dangerous because, in monkey language, staring is a threat. The monkeys look up in the air or at the ground, or stare at some imaginary point outside the cage. But as time passes, sitting still and pretending (C) authority / indifference are no longer sufficient strategies to keep the situation under control. To avoid aggression and to reduce stress, an act of communication is needed to make it clear to the other monkey that no harm is intended.
(A) (B)	(C)
① prevent	generous	authority
② prevent	hostile	authority
③ prevent	hostile	indifference
④ start	hostile	indifference
⑤ start	generous	authority

- November 13 through November 15: Anyone who brings three cans of food will receive a coupon for $6 admission. All food will be donated to the local food bank.

① 2년에 한 번씩 개최된다.
② 11월 한 달 내내 진행되는 행사이다.
③ 매표소는 행사 기간 중 오후 8시에 문을 닫는다.
④ 62세 이상의 관람객은 무료로 입장한다.
⑤ 음식을 기부하면 입장료 할인 쿠폰을 받는 날이 있다.


	

영어 영역(A형)	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

30. Winter Theater Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?
31. 
Denali’s Flightseeing에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지
않는 것은?


DENALI’S FLIGHTSEEING






Enjoy the view of Alaska’s scenic highlights on a flightseeing tour with Denali’s Flying Service. Fly among the peaks of the Alaska Range with fantastic views and soar over the glaciers.
- Your tour begins at Anchorage’s Lake Hood.
- Every passenger gets a window seat.
- Available to all ages

What  to Bring
- Please bring sunglasses, as well as comfortable shoes or hiking boots for glacier landings.
- Due to unpredictable Alaskan weather, Denali’s advises dressing in a light waterproof jacket, which will allow you to stay warm and dry during landings.

Price and Duration
- $385 per person
- 3 hours






① 캠프 참가자는 전문가의 지도를 받는다.
② 연령에 따라 두 반으로 나뉜다.
③ 등록 기간은 10월 말까지이다.
④ 캠프 마지막 날에 캠프 참가자들이 공연을 한다.
⑤ 반의 인원수는 한정되어 있다.

* Notes
- Special rates for kids aged 12 and under
- No set departure times ― all tours are by request




① 알래스카 산맥 지역을 비행한다.
② 모든 승객은 창가 쪽 좌석에 앉게 된다.
③ 탑승 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
④ 방수 재킷을 입는 것이 권장된다.
⑤ 미리 정해진 출발 시간은 없다.










	

6	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

32.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The graph above shows the percentage of people holding a driving license within age groups by gender in Scotland in 2011. ① In total, a higher proportion of males (76%) held a license compared to females (60%), and in each age group the percentage of males was higher than that of females. ② The percentage of license holders for males in the 35 to 44 age group was exactly the same as that for males in the 45 to 59 age group. ③ The percentage of females holding a license peaked in the 35 to 44 age group. ④ The percentage gap between male and female license holders was the biggest in those aged 75 and over. ⑤ On the other hand, the percentage gap between male and female license holders was the smallest in the 25 to 34 age group.







3.다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
 My hands were wet with sweat and I was shaking. Part of my mind was screaming out to me to turn back. I was standing on the bridge, preparing myself to jump off. There was an instructor on either side of my arms to keep me from falling off. The two men screamed, “FIVE, FOUR, THREE, TWO, ONE, GO!” Finally I jumped as far out as I could. My eyes closed and all I could hear was the wind flying past me. Then I felt the rope catch my ankles. My body jerked. Hanging upside down, I opened my eyes to see two hills reflected on the ocean. “I made it!” I thought to myself. I let out a satisfied laugh.
① nervous → proud
② bored → curious
③ hopeful → depressed
④ relaxed → horrified
⑤ pleased → disappointed

[34 ~ 36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. The most persuasive speakers, marketers, and leaders always frame their messages first in 	to
get the “buy in” of the unconscious mind. Only after the immediate concerns of the unconscious have been satisfied can the conscious mind begin to be convinced of, or interested in, anything. Most politicians say, “I will do such­and­such if elected.” But we can’t think about that type of an uncertain future; we can only process the “now.” Similarly, marketers have found some phrases such as “get started today” and “immediate delivery” to be very powerful. Telling someone “It’ll be ready in a month,” or “It usually takes eight weeks for delivery,” will make the sale much more difficult. [3점]
① a musical tone
② the present tense
③ the long­term perspective
④ a few indirect words
⑤ a local language


















35. Some media sociologists claim that it is a mistake to assume that television has destroyed family conversation:
not only can documentaries, soap operas and other programs spark lively discussion among family members, but watching TV together is an important ritual that brings families into the same domestic space. Such arguments miss the point about 	. Can you really have a proper discussion with your spouse about whether she should leave her job if you are both half­watching TV? While television has potential to stimulate the mind and emotions, it is essentially a passive medium which draws us away from human interaction, whereas conversation is in essence an active form of engagement with others. [3점]
① what the ideal family size is
② different gender roles in the family
③ how parents’ attitude affects children
④ what a quality family conversation looks like
⑤ the generation gap between parents and children


	

영어 영역(A형)	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

36. The  person  who  relates to  certain  individuals as family
members or friends to the exclusion of others does not affirm that those to whom he relates are better persons. He affirms only that they are his relatives or friends. When a new father tells his two­week­old daughter that she is the “cutest little girl in town,” he is not informing the infant that she would win a beauty contest of girls of her age before a fair panel of judges. He is, more than anything else, telling her that she is his little girl. The same is true in general when people assert that their spouses, their parents, and their sons and daughters are “the best.” The highest praises are used to indicate that certain persons 	. [3점]
① will have to be independent early
② are to be under extreme pressure
③ are the target of others’ criticism
④ are the specific objects of affection
⑤ have a network of many influential people
















37.다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 As you know, email is a popular, easy way to stay in contact with friends and family. The emails you send to your friends are most likely informal.  (A)  , an email about  dinner plans might be only a few lines long and use the same language you would use if you were talking in person. When you are communicating with someone professionally, however, email is more important. In fact, email is often the main mode of communication for scientists ― so how you write an email can shape what other scientists think of your character. A well­written email can impress the reader and show that you are thoughtful and responsible, whereas a poorly written email can damage productive relationships or keep you from forming new ones.  (B)   , before sending   an email, you must carefully consider your audience and the tone you will use.
(A) (B)
① In contrast	Moreover
② For example	Therefore
③ In contrast	On the contrary
④ For example	On the contrary
⑤ Nevertheless	Therefore

38.다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
 Colored flags are used to give important signals to drivers during auto races. ① The green flag means “start” or “continue,” and the yellow flag tells drivers to slow down and hold position. ② The red flag is a signal to stop, and when drivers see the black flag, they know they must pull into the pit area immediately. ③ A blue flag with yellow stripes is used to tell slower drivers to pull over and allow the leaders to pass. ④ Flags are used to represent organizations and groups of people such as the Olympic flag and the flag of the United Nations. ⑤ The two favorite flags of most drivers are: the white flag, which means “one lap to go,” and the checkered flag, which means “you have reached the finish.”


39.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한 곳은? [3점]

 When faced with a bunch of watermelons, all promising delicious juiciness inside, how do you know which one to pick? ( ① ) It is suggested that you skip the tapping and instead check the bottom of the watermelon. ( ② ) Tapping a watermelon like a bongo might work for some people, but it’s too subjective. ( ③ ) And there’s no agreement on whether a watermelon is supposed to sound “solid” or “tight” or even make a b­flat sound. ( ④ ) This is where the watermelon sat on the ground while it soaked up the sun at the farm. ( ⑤ ) If this spot is white or greenish, your watermelon may have been picked too soon and might not be as ripe as it should be.

40.주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?


(A) If that is true of you, then you can combat those feelings by serving others. Making a difference ― even a small one ― in the lives of other people lifts one’s self­esteem.
(B) In addition to that, adding value to others makes them value you more. It creates a cycle of positive feeling from one person to another.
(C) They focus excessively on themselves. They can become self­protective and selfish because they feel that they have to be to survive.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)


	

8	영어 영역(A형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)
(C)

(D) 







41.윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Building Your Own Career
② Lazy Hands Make a Man Poor
③ When Do Workers Work Harder?
④ Who Are Effective Supermarket Managers?
⑤ Importance of Cooperation in the Workplace

42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① surrounded by productive colleagues
② offered praise and appreciation
③ allowed to work with a friend
④ provided with higher pay
⑤ given more leisure time


[43 ∼ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

 There was a sign in a store window, which said, “Boy wanted.” A boy named Crawford Hill walked into the store, applied for the job, and was hired. Mr. Peters, the store owner, instructed (a) him to go into the attic of the building. “You will find a long, deep box up there,” he said. “I want you to sort through the contents and see what should be saved.”







43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

4.밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45.윗글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Crawford는 상자의 내용물을 분류하라는 지시를 받았다.
② Mr. Peters는 훗날 Crawford에게 사업 관리를 맡겼다.
③ Crawford는 상자 안에서 발견한 돈을 Mr. Peters에게 주었다.
④ Mr. Peters는 Crawford의 정직성을 시험하였다.
⑤ Mr. Peters는 다락방에서 20달러를 잃어버렸다.


	
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1







1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s time to go to bed.
② Let’s not buy this apartment.
③ Sleep is better than medicine.
④ The neighbors are really noisy.
⑤ This new house has enough rooms.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. We need to get a new fridge.
② Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
③ Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
④ Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
⑤ Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.



3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
② Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
③ It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done.
④ Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next.
⑤ Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.



4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 Eva’s Bakery의 위치를 고르시오.




5. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
② 요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고
③ 주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고
④ 체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고
⑤ 새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고


6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비
② 배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법
③ 선상 화재의 주된 원인
④ 연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류
⑤ 배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령


7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
② 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
③ 컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
④ 컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
⑤ 컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계


8. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
② 장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
③ 장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
④ 장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
⑤ 장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.

9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.


①	②




③	④	⑤





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


10. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 서점 직원 － 고객	② 연극 연출가 － 배우
③ 동화 작가 － 독자	④ 도서관 사서 － 학생
⑤ 출판사 편집장 － 삽화가

11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수업 참관하기	② 만화 그려 주기
③ 팸플릿 복사하기	④ 읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤ 현장 학습 일정표 만들기

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  점심 사 오기	② 사진 가져오기
③ 기사 작성하기	④ 카메라 빌려 주기
⑤ 전시회 준비하기

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 언급한 계약서상의 오류를 고르시오.

①
배송지
② 제품명
③ 제품 수량
④
보증 기간
⑤ 배송 날짜


14. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 head chef에 지원하지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서
② 기숙사 생활을 해야 해서
③ 호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서
④ 요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서
⑤ 프랑스어를 못해서

15. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $30	② $36	③ $40	④ $50	⑤ $54

16. Amazing Art Lovers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 43년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다.
② 지난 10년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다.
③ 일주일 전에, 공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
④ 전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
⑤ 전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을 고르시오.


①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 
대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Great! I’m sure I can find some books there.
② Oh, good! You can help me find the library.
③ Sure. I finished writing my biology paper.
④ I know. That’s why I like going to the zoo.
⑤ That’s okay. I already know how to get there.


19. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① You have to renew your driver’s license.
② I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
③ Then you should easily pass the test this time.
④  I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
⑤  No wonder you’re curious about your test results.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Paul이 Jennifer에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Paul:   	
① Would you fax me the document right away?
② Will you copy the document for the meeting?
③ If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
④ I have no choice but to visit your office.
⑤ Please check whether you got my fax.



[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 졸업식 행사 참석을 권유하려고
② 학교 축제 프로그램을 안내하려고
③ 학생 송별회 준비 사항을 점검하려고
④ 생일 파티 전문 업체를 홍보하려고
⑤ 국제 영화제 개막식에 초청하려고


22. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① 리본	② 카드	③ 풍선
④ 케이크	⑤ 카메라




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


23. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Good news for pet shop owners!

We, ABLE Shipping, have developed the perfect system for shipping fish to your customers. We can ship live fish across the nation, and the fish will do  just fine. Are you wondering how we ensure each fish has a safe journey? Here’s the secret. We pack each  one in an oxygen-inflated plastic bag with enough water to keep the fish relaxed and comfortable. Furthermore, each bag is wrapped in a cushion and then placed inside a shipping box. Your fish will enjoy the journey all the way to your customers’ front doors. Call us at 1-800-456-4959 or e-mail us at fishlove@ableshipping.com, and you’ll see how it works.

① 가맹점 운영의 장점을 홍보하려고
② 물고기 질병 예방법을 공지하려고
③ 애완동물용 먹이 종류를 소개하려고
④ 애완동물 동반 여행 수칙을 안내하려고
⑤ 물고기 안전 배송 서비스를 광고하려고











24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In our efforts to be the good child, the uncomplaining employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever they want us to do. At times, we lose track of our own boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life, both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to say yes to our true self, we feel empowered, and our relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say   no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your  true voice to say what you really want to say.
① 난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
② 항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다.
④ 자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다.
⑤ 제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다.
25. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Some people punish themselves when they are under time pressure. They delete all the games on their PC, they stop going for walks, and they don’t spend time with their friends. They then have less pleasure in life and less balance ― and their work performance actually declines. Break out of this pattern by paying more attention to relaxation and getting more involved in living when you are under pressure. Define clear time periods for this: half an hour for a walk, ten minutes to play a game on your PC, and so on. Your mind will become more creative during the break, and you will become mentally fitter. Free time without feelings of guilt will give you the strength to do high-quality work in the remaining time. Furthermore, a certain amount of recreation reduces the chances of developing stress-related disorders.
① 컴퓨터 게임 중독의 심각성
② 직장 내 대인 관계의 중요성
③ 집중력과 학습 능력 간의 관계
④ 죄책감이 정신 건강에 미치는 영향
⑤ 시간적 압박하에서의 휴식의 필요성












26. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Large animals are actually less dangerous to hikers than smaller ones. Common sense tells us that we should avoid tigers, bears, and other large threatening animals. But smaller animals are actually more threatening than bigger animals. To overcome disadvantages of their size, small animals have developed useful weapons such as poison to protect  themselves in the wild. Each year, only a few people are attacked by tigers or bears, and most of these incidents are caused by the people themselves. However, more people are killed by bites from small poisonous snakes than  by  these large animals. Even more people lose their lives from allergic reactions to common bee stings. For these reasons, hikers should be careful about small dangerous creatures.
① How to Deal with Allergies
② Watch Out for Small Animals!
③ Animals: Human’s True Friends
④ Animals Attack Human Villages!
⑤ Why Are Wild Animals Endangered?




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　I hope you remember our discussion last Monday about the servicing  of  the  washing  machine  ① supplied  to  us  three
months ago. I regret to say the machine is no longer working. As we agreed during the meeting, please send a service engineer as
soon as possible to repair it. The product warranty says ②  that
you provide spare parts and materials for free, but charge for the engineer’s labor. This sounds ③ unfair. I believe the machine’s failure is caused by a manufacturing defect. Initially, it made a lot of noise, and later, it stopped ④ to operate entirely. As it is wholly the company’s responsibility to correct the defect, I hope you will not make us ⑤ pay for the labor component of its repair.
















28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　As we all know, it is not always easy to get work done at the office. There is (A) frequently / rarely quiet time  during regular business hours to sit and concentrate. Office workers are regularly interrupted by ringing phones, impromptu meetings, and chattering coworkers. This can be as frustrating for an employee as it is for the employer who is paying for this nonproductive work time. Working at home can free you from these (B) attractions / distractions , giving you long blocks of time to focus on your work. Although your home may present its own problems, too, there are ways to deal with them. Your productivity will certainly (C) decrease / increase , as will the quality of your work product. At the same time, you will get to enjoy the personal satisfaction of focusing on your work and getting it done.
29. 
Modern Pottery Museum에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Modern  Pottery  Museum






The Modern Pottery Museum exhibits collections of artistic ceramic works. It also offers information about the history and development of modern pottery. Visitors can make their own plates or cups for an additional fee.

Hours*
Weekdays: 9:00 a.m. － 6:00 p.m.
Weekends: 9:00 a.m. － 5:00 p.m.
* The museum is closed on the first Monday of every month.

Fees
General Admission: $5 Children under 12: Free Pottery Experience: $10

Parking
A parking discount is available to museum visitors. To receive the discount, visitors must have their parking tickets stamped at the visitor information desk.


① 방문객은 추가 비용 없이 접시나 컵을 만들 수 있다.
② 주말은 평일보다 관람 시간이 1시간 더 길다.
③ 매주 월요일에 휴관한다.
④ 12세 미만의 어린이는 입장료가 $5이다.
⑤ 방문객은 주차 요금을 할인받을 수 있다.

* impromptu: 즉석의
(A) (B)	(C)
①  frequently  …… distractions  …… increase
②  frequently  …… attractions    …… decrease
③ rarely	……  distractions  …… increase
④ rarely	…… attractions    …… decrease
⑤ rarely	……  distractions  …… decrease


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


30. Nature Foundation 회원의 혜택에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
31. 
Harmony Youth Orchestra Auditions에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



BECOME A MEMBER OF THE NATURE FOUNDATION

The Nature Foundation is a world-wide organization dedicated to the preservation of our natural environment. Help us by joining today, and enjoy all the benefits of membership for only $50 per year.

Members receive:
?Our monthly magazine, Nature World, for one year.
?A weekly newsletter about upcoming events held by the Foundation.
?Invitations to special lectures on natural history and environmental science.

Members also get:
?A   10%   discount   on   books   published   by   the Foundation.
?A   20%   discount   on   our   other   magazines   like
Nature Kids.
?Discounted admission to national parks.

If you have further questions about membership benefits, please call us at 987-555-4567 or visit our website at www.naturefoundation.org.


Harmony Youth Orchestra Auditions For the 2014 Season
Audition Dates: December 16th-20th, 2013

The Harmony Youth Orchestra is for you if you wish to participate in great musical performances under Harmony’s conductor.

You must...
?currently be a middle or high school student.
?send in a completed audition application form and a recommendation from your music teacher by November 30th.
?prepare   to   play   a   piece   of   your   choice   for   the audition.

You will...
?receive  an  e-mail  with  your  audition  time  and  place about 10 days before your audition day.
?be notified of the final results by e-mail about a week after the audition.

Application	forms	can	be	downloaded	from	the Harmony Youth Orchestra website (www.hyo.org).










① 일 년에 $50를 내면 모든 혜택을 누린다.
② 일 년 동안 월간 잡지 Nature World를 받는다.
③ 재단 주최 행사에 관한 월간 뉴스레터를 받는다.
④ 재단 발행 도서 구입 시 10%를 할인받는다.
⑤ 국립공원 입장료를 할인받는다.

① 오디션 기간은 2013년 12월 16일부터 20일까지이다.
②  중?고등학생들이 지원할 수 있다.
③ 11월 30일까지 지원서와 추천서를 제출해야 한다.
④ 오디션 시간과 장소를 이메일로 받는다.
⑤ 오디션의 최종 결과를 전화로 통지받는다.
















이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?











　The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007. ① In these groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the Canadian average rate was 46%. ② The average annual hours increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and 34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours. ③ The 15-24 age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second fewest average annual hours. ④ The 35-44 age group had fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while
the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average annual hours. ⑤ Despite their lowest rate of volunteering, seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than
any other age group.





[33～35]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을   고르시오.
33. In all cultures in which eye-gaze behavior has been studied, science  confirms  that  those  who  are  dominant  have  more
 	  in using it. In essence, these individuals are entitled to look wherever they want. However, subordinates  are more restricted in where they can look and when. Humility dictates that in the presence of royalty, as in church, heads are bowed. As a general rule, dominants tend to ignore subordinates visually while subordinates tend to gaze at dominant individuals at a distance. In other words, higher-status individuals can be indifferent while lower-status persons are required to be attentive with their gaze. The king   is free to look at anyone he wants, but all subjects face the
king, even as they back out of a room. [3점]
* be entitled to: (～할) 권한이 있다
① anxiety	② conflict	③ freedom
④ reluctance	⑤ responsibility
34. 
The importance of science has led people to think that ‘objectivity’ is the best way to see the world ― to see the facts without any feelings. However, from a human point of view, objectivity is just another attitude. It is an interpretation that deliberately ignores our feelings. It is very useful to ensure that scientific measurements are taken accurately and so on, but as far as life is concerned, it is a bit like turning the color off on your TV so that you see everything in black and white and then saying that is more truthful. It is not more truthful; it is just a
filter  that  reduces  the 	. When you turn down the feelings, you also turn down the possibility
of enjoyment. [3점]
① richness of life
② brutality of humans
③ size of the TV screen
④ incorrectness of a theory
⑤ criticism of scientific findings













35. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new product features, they are usually focused on solving just one problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution will 	.
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their
suggestions ― the added feature turns out to be worthless because of the problems it causes. [3점]
* ramification: 파생된 문제
① impact other product or service functions
② delay the introduction of innovative products
③ induce other customers to make additional requests
④ bring about excessive competition among companies
⑤ discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


36. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Self-monitoring refers to how much  people  try to control the way they present themselves to others. Those who have high self-monitoring want their behavior to be socially acceptable. They adjust themselves to any social signal that indicates  appropriate  or inappropriate behavior. 	(A)	, if they are in a meeting and see others making suggestions, they will try to make suggestions as well. They are also good at managing what others think about them. 	(B)		, those who have low self-monitoring are not very sensitive to signals indicating socially acceptable behavior. They are not too concerned about behaving the right way in a specific context. For example, if they are in a meeting with the president of an organization, they may act bored. They are not deeply
concerned about how others see them.

(A) (B)
①  For example  …… As a result
②  For example  …… In contrast
③ Otherwise	…… As a result
④ Meanwhile	……  In contrast
⑤ Meanwhile	…… Nevertheless









37. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

(A) Columbus was still more than a thousand miles from Europe, and he feared he would never live to tell the king and queen of his discovery. So he wrote the news on a piece of paper.
(B) In 1493, Christopher Columbus sent one of the earliest  and most famous bottled messages. He was returning to Spain to tell the king and queen about what he had discovered, when his ship got caught in a bad storm.
(C) He put it in a wooden bottle and tossed  it  overboard. More than 300 years later, it was found by the captain of an American ship off the coast of Africa, near Morocco.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
38. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Life can be like riding a roller coaster. There are ups and downs, fast and slow parts, bumps and shaky parts, and even
times when you’re upside down. ① You can’t control which
way the track (or in this case, life events) will take you.
② When you’re at the bottom, you can see only what’s right   in front of you, but when you get to the top, you can see the
whole picture a lot better. ③ When you’re starting out, accept how you feel and try to enjoy the ride. ④ When you design an
amusement park for children, you should carefully consider the location of the roller coaster. ⑤ When it’s over, you’ll see that it was really cool ― even if you couldn’t see that when
you first started.

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? [3점]


　As Tom was waiting for a bus, he noticed a  blind  man trying to cross the street. ( ① ) The traffic was heavy, and it was likely the blind man would get hit, as he was not crossing at a crosswalk. ( ② ) Tom  looked around and saw there was  no one else to help, so he asked the blind man if he would like help crossing the street. ( ③ ) The  blind  man  readily  said yes, then latched onto Tom’s arm, and they began their walk across the street avoiding speeding cars. ( ④ ) When Tom looked back at the bus stop bench, he saw another man sitting next to his book bag. (  ⑤ )  And when Tom  got to the bus  stop bench, the man said, “I saw what you were doing, so I
decided to sit here and watch your book bag.”
* latch onto: ～에 달라붙다

40. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I had volunteered for the charity picnic, and I needed to be there on time. Ms. Green, the charity president, was preparing this monthly event by herself. Lily complained, “Mom, I don’t feel like going today. We’ve volunteered more than five times this year.” She was eating slower than usual. I urged  her,  “Lily,  don’t you remember we promised to help Ms. Green  last month? Go and get dressed.” I stood by the door and pointed at my watch. She slowly pulled on her sweater and said, “I still don’t feel like going.” I started losing  my  patience. I responded, “Don’t you know Ms. Green has a lot   of work to do for the picnic today? It’s time you started thinking about other people.” My voice was growing louder with each sentence.
① bored	② irritated	③ envious
④ indifferent	⑤ delighted



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)
　One day, when I saw my grandmother on the street by chance, I noticed that (b) she had difficulty in reading an English sign. Right at that moment, it hit upon me to teach  her to read English in return for all she had taught me. I  talked to my mom about it, and (c) she was delighted with  my plan. So my grandmother and I worked hard together using books for beginners.


(C)







41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Move Your Fences Closer
② Why Does Teamwork Matter?
③ Is Statistics Necessary in Sports?
④  Change Your Team for More Benefits
⑤  Better Park Conditions: Size vs. Wind



42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① strengths	② perceptions	③ incomes
④ sacrifices	⑤ appearances






[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(D)
　My grandmother liked to tell me these interesting stories at night. I still remember a few stories in which the gods made promises with each other like humans. Those who broke their promises were punished. While listening to the stories, I decided that I would not break any promises. The morals of
(e) her stories taught me how I should live my life.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (C) － (D)	② (B) － (D) － (C)
③ (C) － (B) － (D)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 grandmother에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 18세에 그리스에서 미국으로 이민을 왔다.
② 학교에서 읽기를 배운 적이 없다.
③ 필자와 초보자용 책으로 공부하였다.
④ 필자의 생일 케이크에 축하 문구로 장식을 하였다.
⑤ 필자에게 밤에 재미있는 이야기를 듣는 것을 좋아했다.






이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2013학년도 7월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지	1
영어 영역 (B형)
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.



1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① Sorry, I was tied up with work.
② Wow! Your musical talent is awesome.
③ No, the musical will begin at 7 o’clock.
④ Oh, no! I saw that musical last weekend.
⑤ You can pick up the ticket at your convenience.

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① The due date has been delayed.
② Sorry, I’ll do a better job next time.
③ Great! Your essay will be published.
④ You haven’t handed in your essay yet.
⑤ You didn’t have a strong enough opinion.

3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① That’s why I wanted to buy it.
② I’m sorry it’s out of stock now.
③ We can buy an energy­saving model.
④ I just wish I knew how to fix it myself.
⑤ We could have bought a cheaper air conditioner.

4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 선물 고르는 법을 조언하려고
② 모임의 일정 변경을 공지하려고
③ 조언에 대해 감사를 표현하려고
④ 초대장의 작성 절차를 설명하려고
⑤ 초대를 거절하는 방법을 알려주려고

5. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 컴퓨터 암호는 주기적으로 변경해야 한다.
② 개인정보 보호법 위반 시 처벌을 강화해야 한다.
③ 컴퓨터 바이러스 백신 프로그램을 설치해야 한다.
④ 개인정보가 포함된 파일은 암호를 설정해야 한다.
⑤ 개인정보 유출에 따른 대처 방법을 숙지해야 한다.


① 옷에 묻은 잉크 얼룩을 제거하는 요령
② 식기세척기용 세제 사용 시 유의점
③ 헤어스프레이 사용 자제의 필요성
④ 옷감의 재질에 따른 올바른 세탁
⑤ 신소재 섬유의 다양한 용도

7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 세대 간 문화 공유의 중요성
② 학업 스트레스를 줄이는 방법
③ 건강을 위한 여가 활동의 종류
④ 건전한 공연 문화의 정착 방안
⑤ 청소년 문화 공간 확충의 필요성

8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.

① curator - visitor	② journalist - photographer
③ tourist - tour guide	④ painter - talk show host
⑤ explorer - producer


9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 청첩장 발송하기	② 저녁식사 준비하기
③ 설문 결과 정리하기	④ 신혼여행 예약하기
⑤ 웨딩 플래너 소개하기




2	영어 영역 (B형)


1 . 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy a thank­you gift
② to thank the students for her
③ to take her father to the hospital
④ to let her know his phone number
⑤ to find the student who helped her father

12.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지하철 이용을 선호하는 이유를 고르시오.

① 교통 체증이 없기 때문에
② 환경을 보호할 수 있기 때문에
③ 교통비를 절약할 수 있기 때문에
④ 건강에 여러모로 도움이 되기 때문에
⑤ 출퇴근 시간을 다양하게 활용할 수 있기 때문에

13. 대화를 듣고, 졸업 여행에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 기간	③ 비용	④ 참가자수	⑤ 교통수단

14.대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $ 18	② $ 20	③ $ 26	④ $ 36	⑤ $ 40

15. 2013 Talent Show의 오디션에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 이틀에 걸쳐 진행된다.
② 첫째 날에 댄스 오디션이 있다.
③ 지원자 수에는 제한이 없다.
④ 지원서를 학생회실에 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 토요일이다.

16.llama에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
① 남미 지역에서 무리를 지어 생활한다.
② 사람들에게 쉽게 접근한다.
③ 간단한 일을 반복을 통해 배울 수 있다.
④ 주변 환경에 둔감하여 코요테의 표적이 된다.
⑤ 산악 지역 사람들에게 유용하다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고 , 남자가 예약하고자 하는 통나무집을 고르시오.

Springfield Resort Room Rates

①
②
③
④
⑤

18. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:  	
① Actually, I paid with my credit card.
② Okay. How much should I pay for it?
③ No. I still want to cancel my reservation.
④ Sorry, but can you tell me where my package is now?
⑤ This is obviously your fault, so I want to get a full refund.

19. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① I hope you can help me settle the conflict.
② The first impression tells a lot about the person.
③ A recruit needs to be careful about his behavior.
④ Yeah, it’s not good to judge others with prejudice.
⑤ You’d better stop complaining about working overtime.

20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Minsu가 Sujin에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Minsu:  	
① Don’t hurry. First think, then speak.
② Cheer up! When one door shuts, another opens.
③ Let’s give it a try. Experience is the best teacher.
④ Be careful. A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
⑤ Give me a hand. A friend in need is a friend indeed.

[21~22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

21. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① to raise funds for building a community center
② to explain the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
③ to encourage people to participate in a walking event
④ to introduce a new treatment for Parkinson’s disease
⑤ to report the achievements of a volunteer organization

2 .기금이 쓰이는 용도로 언급되지 않은 것은?

① 행사 홍보	② 파킨슨병 연구
③ 기념품 제작	④ 파킨슨병 환자 치료
⑤ 병원 건립 지원




영어 영역 (B형)	3

23.다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?

　One of the key fears we all have is fear that this is the wrong time to start whatever our project is, and we should wait until the “time is right.” Tim Ferriss, author of the bestselling  book  The 4­Hour Workweek,  has  this  to  say            about timing: “For all the most important things, the timing is always wrong. Waiting for a good time to quit your job? The stars will never align and the traffic lights of life will never all be green at the same time. Conditions are never perfect. ‘Someday’ is a disease that will take your dreams to the grave with you. If it’s important to you and you want to do it ‘eventually,’ just do it and correct course along the way.” If you wait for the timing to be right before you make a move, you may never make a move at all.

① 원하는 일은 때를 기다리지 말고 바로 실행하라.
② 꿈을 실현하기 위한 구체적인 계획을 세워라.
③ 결과보다는 노력의 과정에 의미를 부여하라.
④ 성공을 위해 일의 우선순위를 정하라.
⑤ 과거의 실패에 얽매이지 마라.










24.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

　The biggest game­changer in our future is life prolongation. It works for mice and worms, and surely it will work for the rest of us some day. Biologists are now tinkering with so­called anti­aging substances, trying to get you the benefit of life prolongation. But, life gets its edge from the possibility of its ending. What will life be like when we live forever? No one dies. No one gets older. No more evolution. No need to hurry. If you want something done, give it to a busy man, but nobody needs to be busy when you have forever. Who is going to do the real work, then? Chosen people who will volunteer or be volunteered to be mortal. Life without death changes absolutely everything. If we want things to stay as they are, then things will have to change.

① Life driven by purpose is meaningful.
② Life extension is not a shift for the better.
③ Pursuing eternity is the nature of humanity.
④ The working population will decrease in the future.
⑤ Living slowly and selflessly makes you stay young.

25.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

　In Western culture, playing the masculine role has traditionally required traits such as independence, assertiveness, and dominance. Females are expected to be more nurturing and sensitive to other people. Are these masculine and feminine roles universal? Could biological differences between the sexes lead inevitably to gender differences in behavior? In 1935, anthropologist Margaret Mead compared the gender roles adopted by people in three tribal societies on the island of New Guinea, and her observations are certainly thought­provoking. In the Arapesh tribe, both men and women were taught to play what we would regard as a feminine role: They were cooperative, non­aggressive, and sensitive to the needs of others. Both men and women of the Mundugumor tribe were brought up to be aggressive and emotionally unresponsive to other people ─ a masculine pattern of behavior by Western standards. Finally, the Tchambuli tribe displayed a pattern of gender­role development that was the direct opposite of the Western pattern: Males were passive, emotionally dependent, and socially sensitive, whereas females were dominant, independent, and assertive.

① Every Tribe Has Its Own Gender Roles
② Changes in Gender Roles Throughout Time
③ Why Do We Have Gender Roles in Human Society?
④ Gender Differences in Temperament: Nature or Culture?
⑤ A Controversial Topic in Anthropology: Gender Discrimination





26. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?

　In college, McCormack was a pretty amazing golfer. One day, ① he had the good fortune to play against future golfing legend Arnold Palmer. After ② his collegiate golf days, McCormack got a law degree, and his friend Palmer turned to him for legal advice. At the time, athletes were not the constant presence in pop culture and advertising as they are today. But McCormack noticed that professional athletes were like actors. And ③ he recognized that they had adoring fans who wanted to meet them in person and, possibly, use the products they used. As a lawyer, ④ he understood how agencies helped get endorsements for their actors. Using that model, he arranged for Palmer to play golf with heads of companies to connect ⑤ his image with products just like actors did. Before long, Palmer’s income jumped. Other golfers signed on, and McCormack created IMG, the first major sports management agency.
* endorsement: (유명인의) 상품 보증 선전





4	영어 영역 (B형)


27.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?

　William H. Whyte turned video cameras on a number of spaces in New York City, watching to see ① how people used the spaces. He made a number of fascinating findings, and he had the video evidence to back ② them up. Even in the crowded city, he found that many urban spaces were usually deserted; people flocked to a few busy plazas even when they were planning to sit alone. Why? The most common activity among people observed by Whyte ③ turning out to be watching other people. And it was also found that people liked to be watched! Whyte expected lovers to ④ be found in private, isolated spaces, but most often they sat or stood right in the center of things for everyone to see. Further, people having private conversations would stand in the middle of the sidewalk, forcing people ⑤ to step around them.






















28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?

　The decline in manufacturing will inevitably bring about a new protectionism. The first reaction  to a period of turbulence is to try to build a wall that ① shields one’s own garden from the cold winds outside. But such walls no longer protect businesses that do not meet world standards. It will only make them more ② prosperous. The best example is Mexico, which had a deliberate policy of building its domestic economy ③ independent of the outside world. It did this not only by building high walls of protectionism to keep foreign competition out, but by practically forbidding its own companies to export. This attempt to create a purely Mexican economy ④ failed. Mexico actually became increasingly dependent on imports from other countries. It was finally ⑤ obliged to open itself to the outside world.

29.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


　The above graph shows the number of patent applications from China, the United States, Japan, South Korea and the European Patent Office from 1990 to 2011. ① Between 1990 and 2005, Japan had the largest number of patent applications while the United States had the second largest. ② However, the United States overtook Japan in 2006, and had more than 400,000 patent applications. ③ The combined number of patent applications in South Korea and the European Patent Office in 2011 was larger than the number of patent applications in the United States in the same year. ④ While the European Patent Office had the third largest number of patent applications in 1990, it had the least number of patent applications in 2011. ⑤ What is noticeable is that the number of patent applications in China soared dramatically from 2003 to 2011, surpassing that of the United States in 2011.



30. saffron에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Without question saffron is the most expensive spice in the world. Out of 100,000 to 250,000 handpicked plants, one pound of saffron is yielded. First found in the Near East in Asia Minor, it was used by the Persians as both a flavor enhancer and dye. The blue­violet and lily shaped flowers of the plant appear in autumn. At the center of these flowers are three blood­red stigmas, which are the saffron threads that form the spice. It is better to buy the stigma rather than powdered saffron because the powder may be already mixed with other ingredients. Very little should be used, not only because of the expense, but because too much can emit a medicinal taste. In Indian cooking it is used in pilafs and biryani dishes. Saffron is also found on the foreheads of Indian women denoting their social class.
* stigma: 암술머리

① 세계에서 가장 비싼 향신료이다.
② 페르시아 사람들이 조미료와 염료로 사용했다.
③ 꽃 중앙에 3개의 붉은색 암술머리가 있다.
④ 암술머리보다 분말로 된 것을 구입하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 인도 여성의 사회적 계층을 표시하는 데 사용된다.




영어 영역 (B형)	5

[31~36]  다음 빈칸에  들어갈  말로 가장 적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. The relationship between physical products and individual ownership is undergoing a profound evolution. We don’t want
the CD; we want the music it plays. We don’t want the disc; we want the storage it holds. We don’t want the answering machine; we want the messages it saves. We don’t want the DVD; we want the movie it carries. In other words, we want not the stuff but the needs or experiences it fulfills. As our possessions “dematerialize” into the intangible, our preconceptions of ownership are changing, creating a dotted line between “what’s mine,” “what’s yours,” and “what’s ours.” This shift is fueling a world where 	has more value than possession, and as Kevin Kelly, a founder of Wired magazine, puts it, where “access is better than ownership.”

① disposal	② donation	③ usage
④ cooperation	⑤ intelligence














32. Scientists and educators have long sought to understand the emergence of expertise, artistic and otherwise. Many
researchers have argued that exceptional achievement can simply come down to 	. Studies of eminent scientists in the 1950s supported this view by underscoring the individuals’ capacity for endurance, concentration and commitment to effortful practice. Benjamin Bloom, an education psychologist, wrote in 1985 that none of his subjects achieved expertise without a supportive environment and a long and intensive period of training. This education came first from encouraging instructors and later from demanding master teachers. A few years later psychologist K. Anders Ericsson of Florida State University conducted studies of experts in piano, violin, chess, or athletics. The investigations revealed that a person’s level of achievement correlated strongly with the amount of practice put in.

① hard work
② deep insight
③ physical strength
④ emotional stability
⑤ extraordinary talent
3 
. In the command­and­control management model, plans were considered destiny. Top management formulated exacting plans
for every aspect of operations and then kept everything under tight control to “meet the plan.” All too often, however, plans were derailed by unanticipated events. Planning is no longer the exclusive domain of top management; it now typically involves those who carry out the plans because they are closer to the customer. Planning experts, who recommend strategic agility, say managers need to 	to take advantage of opportunities. A good analogy of this would be an improvisational comedy act. The stand­up comic has a plan for the introduction, structure of the act, some tried­and­true jokes, and closing remarks. Within this planned framework, the comic will play off the audience’s input and improvise as necessary.
[3점]

① analyze the latest market trends
② share their plans with co­workers
③ make the workplace more enjoyable
④ develop a detailed manual in advance
⑤ balance planned action with flexibility












34. Let’s think about flipping a coin. If you get ten heads in a row, what is the likelihood that the next flip will be
heads? Don’t be fooled ― it’s 50 percent, the same as it is on any single coin flip. Most people think the chances of getting heads will actually be lower than 50 percent ― the opposite of momentum. They know they should see roughly the same number of heads as tails (50-50), so they feel that if they have seen ten heads in a row, they are due for a tails. A tails has to emerge. But it doesn’t. There is no law of averages. If the process is random, there is no predictability. This is also what drives the “gambler’s fallacy.” Gamblers on losing streaks erroneously believe they are due for a win and keep gambling, thinking that their luck
 	. But if the whole thing is random, you aren’t due for anything. Your chances haven’t changed at all. [3점]		* streak: (성공이나 실패의) 연속

① is running out
② has to even out
③ is a coincidence
④ rouses others’ jealousy
⑤ breaks the law of averages




6	영어 영역 (B형)


35. If you have ever had a sip of the “bitters,” you would probably frown just thinking about it. According to a study
from researchers at Brooklyn College, the horrible taste does more than that. Researchers had fifty­seven students rate their moral distaste for several morally dubious acts, such as politicians taking bribes, students cheating on tests, and the like. Before they started rating the acts, the students drank shots of one of three drinks: bitter tasting liquid, sweet beverage, or water. On a 100­point scale, with 100 being the worst rating for a morally reprehensible act, the students who drank the bitter liquid gave the acts an average rating of 78; those who drank the sweet beverage gave an average of 60; and the water group gave an average of 62. The ratings of the sweet beverage and water groups were statistically the same, but the bitter liquid group rating was significantly higher. This study suggests that the bad taste
 	.

① reminds the eaters of awful memories
② increases people’s moral disapproval
③ stimulates people’s thirst for drinks
④ helps people produce creative ideas
⑤ makes someone learn to be patient
37. 
다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There are two main strategies we can adopt to improve the quality of life. The first is to try making external conditions match our goals. The second is to change how we experience external conditions to make them fit our goals better. (A) , feeling secure is an important component of happiness. The sense of security can be improved by installing strong locks on the front door, moving to a safer neighborhood, or exerting political pressure on city hall for more police protection. All these different responses are aimed at bringing conditions in the environment more in line with our goals.    (B)    , we can feel more secure by modifying our definition of security. If one does not expect perfect safety, recognizes that risks are inevitable, and succeeds in enjoying a less than ideally predictable world, the threat of insecurity will not have as great a chance of spoiling happiness.

(A) (B)

①
In
addition
……
However
②
In
contrast
……
Consequently
③
In
contrast
……
Likewise
④	For instance	……	As a result
⑤	For instance	……	On the other hand





38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]




36. When a certain word which is to be defined crops up in its own definition, we call it a circular definition. The point of
defining a term is to explain its meaning; this obviously cannot be achieved if you need already to understand the meaning of the    term    in    order    to    understand    the  definition.
 	. For example, to define “stress” as “the physiological and psychological responses to stressful situations” would be to give a circular definition. This is because stressful situations are presumably only recognizable from the fact that they tend to produce stress: but the meaning of “stress” is the very thing which someone requesting the definition is seeking to understand, and so should not be presupposed in the definition. To define “philosophy” as “the activity carried out by philosophers” would be another example of a circular definition. [3점]

① Words out of circulation lose their meanings
② Words should be defined depending on context




(A) When all team members possessed the same information, the group decision exceeded the quality of individual choices. However, the scholars then created a scenario in which each member possessed unique information that his or her colleagues did not have.
(B) To arrive at the optimal decision, individuals needed to share their privately held information. The results showed that “groups were more likely to endorse an inferior option after discussion than were their individual members before discussion.” The scholars surmised that the groups must have had difficulties surfacing all privately held information.
(C) They created four­person groups and asked them to make a decision. The scholars compared the team decision quality with the choices made by individuals given the same information.

③ Circular definitions, then, miss the point of definition

④ To explain words effectively, make use of examples
①
(A) - (C) - (B)
② (B) - (A) - (C)
⑤ Evolution of languages, however, occurs along with time
③
(B) - (C) - (A)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)

⑤
(C) - (B) - (A)




영어 영역 (B형)	7

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




　Because of the transmission of identity from one generation to the next, most children share at least some traits with their parents. These are vertical identities. ( ① ) Attributes and values are passed down from parents to child across the generations not only through strands of DNA, but also through shared cultural norms. ( ② ) Language, for example, is usually vertical, since most people who speak Greek raise their children to speak Greek, too. ( ③ ) Such identities may reflect recessive genes, or values and preferences that a child does not share with his ancestors. ( ④ ) Criminal behavior is often horizontal; most criminals are not raised by gangsters and must invent their own deceptive character. ( ⑤ ) So are conditions such as autism and intellectual disability.	* autism: 자폐증

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]









41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① Money Talks? Not Always!
② Risky Stuff, Not in My Back Yard!
③ Nuclear Waste: Safer than Expected
④ The Price Effect: How the Economy Works
⑤ The Secret of Development in a Small Village

?



42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

① irrational fear
② fierce competition
③ egocentric decisions
④ collective intelligence
⑤ ethical considerations



8	영어 영역 (B형)


[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(A)









(B)

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① (B) - (C) - (D)	② (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)





4 .밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?

① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)






45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 알프스 산맥 동쪽에 있는 한 마을에 아름다운 샘이 있었다.
② 마을 의회는 특별 회의를 통해 샘 관리자를 재고용했다.
③ 매년 열리는 마을 의회에서 의원들은 예산을 검토했다.
④ 샘 관리자는 건강상의 이유로 자진하여 사직했다.
⑤ 정기적인 샘 관리 후 마을은 인기 있는 휴양지가 되었다.


(C)

(D) 


2014학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1







1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I don’t have a computer.
② Right,  I’ll  call  you  when  I’m done.
③ Yeah,  I  saved  it  in  my  cell  phone.
④ Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
⑤ Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.

2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s  true.  She’ll  start  reading  sooner  or  later.
② I’ll  ask  her  teacher  to  choose  her  next  time.
③ Right. She must go to a new school.
④ Sorry to hear that. Better luck next time.
⑤ Great. She must have worked on reading a lot.

3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, I’m not sure where you’re going.
② You’re welcome. I’m happy to watch him.
③ Don’t worry. I’ll come over around 10 a.m.
④ Never  mind.  I’ll  make  him  dinner  tomorrow.
⑤ Okay.  I’ll  let  him  play  but  only  for  an hour.

4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
② 과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③ 얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
④ 과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
⑤ 과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고

5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 뇌우 발생 시 대처 요령
② 뇌우의 다양한 발생 원인
③ 지구의 급격한 기후 변화
④ 날씨와 심리 변화의 상관관계
⑤ 날씨가 야외 활동에 미치는 영향






6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 양초를 만드는 절차
② 등산 시 유의할 사항
③ 적절한 휴식의 필요성
④ 취미 생활을 하는 이유
⑤ 스트레스의 다양한 요인



7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
② 텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
③ 가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다.
④ 지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
⑤ 채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다.



8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 상담 교사 － 학생
② 여행사 직원 － 여행객
③ 수의사 － 애완동물 주인
④ 동물원 사육사 － 관람객
⑤ 국립공원 직원 － 탐방객


9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.














10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 마중 나가기	② 쿠키 사다 주기
③ 도시락 주문하기	④ 교통사고 신고하기
⑤ 사무실에 데려다 주기




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	영어 영역(B 형)


11. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to  rent a laptop	② to visit a museum
③ to  surf the Internet	④ to find some photos
⑤ to review the report

12. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서
② 친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③ 부모님이 허락하지 않아서
④ 방학 숙제를 해야 해서
⑤ 제주도에 가야 해서

13. 대화를 듣고, 선거 포스터에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 후보 기호	② 후보 사진
③ 학교 로고	④ 학교 사진
⑤ 선거 슬로건

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $215	② $225	③ $240	④ $250	⑤ $270

15. 장학금에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
② 면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다.
③ 개인별로 학기당 $1,000가 지급된다.
④ 신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
⑤ 3명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.

16. four-eyed fish에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 각각의 눈이 두 부분으로 나누어져 있다.
② 수면 아래위를 동시에 볼 수 있다.
③ 남아메리카에서 주로 발견된다.
④ 작은 물고기를 잡아먹기도 한다.
⑤ 작은 어항에서 키우기에 적합하다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤
18. 
대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
② It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
③ I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
④ I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
⑤ Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.


19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① Maybe your luck has run out.
② Your wish has finally become a reality.
③ You’d better apply for the music program.
④ If you keep it up, you might get tickets.
⑤ I’m so surprised that you were on TV.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Julia가 Samuel에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julia: Samuel,   	
① could you give me a ride home?
② would you teach me how to park?
③ when did you get your driver’s license?
④ what happened after you parked your car?
⑤ how many times did you take the road test?




[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① developmental stages of human history
② the characteristics of scientific inventions
③ the  difference  between  speaking  and  writing
④ the  significance  of  writing  in  human  history
⑤ ways to promote invention in the modern world


22. 인류의 발명품으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 전구	② 비행기
③ 전화기	④ 현미경
⑤ 망원경




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(B 형)	3

23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Everyone would like to assume that  their  wonderful, creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of  their ideas. This selling is part of the practical aspect of creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form of government, they should explain why it is better than the existing form of government.
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다.
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다.
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다.













24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In the nineteenth century, a decisive moment occurred when people in advertising and journalism discovered that if they framed their stories and appeals with fear, they could capture our attention. It is an emotion we find hard to resist or control, and so they constantly shifted our focus to new possible sources of anxiety: the latest health scare, the new crime wave, and endless hazards in the environment of which we were not aware. With the increasing sophistication of the media and the haunting quality of the imagery, they have been able to give us the feeling that we are fragile creatures in an environment full of danger ― even though we live in a world infinitely safer and more predictable than anything our ancestors knew. With their help, our anxieties have only increased.
① the crisis of modern journalism
② the various sources of human fears
③ the media’s exploitation of human anxieties
④ the importance of advertising and journalism
⑤ the fragile nature of human life in modern society
25. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In the past, many public-sector recreation providers allowed people free access or charged for permits to control  the  amount or season for different recreational activities such as fishing or horse-riding. However, governments and other public agencies are finding that funding to maintain sites and facilities, to cope with increased demand on the landscape, is becoming difficult to maintain. Opportunities to charge  visitors for appropriate services to help compensate for these costs are being considered as one solution. This is a sensitive matter, as free access for all people to the outdoors is a much cherished right. There is also an additional dilemma for public agencies where recreation facilities are already provided from public money, and it could be argued that the taxpayer  is  being charged twice. Thus, care is needed by public bodies to ensure that charges are only made for services that are clearly additional to the provision of free access.
① How to Use Public Facilities for Outdoor Activities
② Public Recreation Services: To Charge or Not?
③ Access to Public Facilities: Denied or Delayed?
④ A Short History of Public Recreation Facilities
⑤ Preserving the Landscape: Torn Between Two Demands



















26. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Zaynab Fawwaz was born into a poor family in South Lebanon. As a young girl ① she went to Alexandria with the Egyptian family for whom she worked. Her mistress was intrigued by her maid’s native intelligence and introduced Zaynab to ② her literate friend, Fatima. She, in turn, taught
her  reading,  writing  and  arithmetic.  Zaynab  quickly learned
what ③ her teacher had to offer and in time went on to study with Egyptian scholars. Eventually, ④ she became very active in women’s issues and she wrote some pioneering poetry and essays focused on women’s rights. The most famous of ⑤ her essays was The Zaynab Letters.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	영어 영역(B 형)


27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Given   that  music  appears	to enhance physical and mental  skills,  are  there  circumstances  where  music is
① damaging to performance? One domain ② which this is  of
considerable significance is music’s potentially damaging effects on the ability to drive safely. Evidence suggests an association between loud, fast music and reckless driving, but how  might music’s ability to influence driving in this way
③ be  explained?  One  possibility  is  that  drivers  adjust  to
temporal regularities in music, and ④ that their speed is influenced accordingly. In other words, just as faster music causes people to eat faster, ⑤ so it causes people to drive at
faster speeds, as they engage mentally and physically with ongoing repeated structures in the music.












28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　England’s plan to establish colonies in North America, starting  in  the  late  sixteenth  century,  was  founded  on a
(A) false / valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia, the region of the North American  continent  to  which  England laid claim, would have the same climate as the Mediterranean region of Europe, since it lay at similar latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American colonies, once established, would be able to supply Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s
(B) dependence / restriction on imports from continental Europe. One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant / scarce timber would do away with the need to import wood from Scandinavia. In  short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty that would quickly turn a profit.
* latitude: 위도 ** prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서
(A) (B)	(C)
① false …… dependence …… abundant
② false …… dependence …… scarce
③ false …… restriction …… abundant
④ valid …… restriction …… scarce
⑤ valid …… restriction …… abundant
29. 
다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?









　The above graph shows the comparison between the allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at Triton Ventures in 2012. ① The Customer Service department was  allocated  60,000  dollars,  which  was  greater  than  the
amount allocated to any other department. ② On the other hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments   that spent the most were Marketing and Development. ③ The
Customer Service and Information Technology departments spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars.
④ The actual spending by the Administration department  was
less than half the allocated budget. ⑤ The Sales department showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its actual spending among the six departments.


30. Georgia O’Keeffe에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　In her art, Georgia O’Keeffe clearly showed a pioneering spirit and an intensely individual style. At age twenty-seven, while teaching art in South Carolina, O’Keeffe began a series of simple, abstract charcoal drawings that expressed her own ideas and feelings. She sent these drawings to a friend in New York, who showed them to Alfred Stieglitz, the owner of the influential gallery 291. Stieglitz hailed them as the “purest, finest, sincerest things.” O’Keeffe’s greatest source of inspiration was nature. Her best-known paintings are large, extreme close-ups of flowers; the simplified and magnified views compel us to look at them in a new way and to discover their inner essence. At the same time, the paintings become abstract arrangements of color and line, light and shadow. While in New Mexico, she was also fascinated by the simple geometric grace of adobe churches and the majesty of the desert.
* adobe: 흙을 재료로 한 건축 양식의 일종
① 27세에 South Carolina에서 미술을 가르쳤다.
② 자신의 드로잉 작품들을 Stieglitz에게 보냈다.
③ 영감을 얻은 가장 큰 원천은 자연이었다.
④ 가장 잘 알려진 그림들은 클로즈업한 꽃 그림이다.
⑤ New Mexico에서 사막의 장엄함에 매료되었다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(B 형)	5

[31～35]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을  고르시오.
31. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of food, and first impressions are important. No matter how appealing the taste, an unattractive appearance is hard to overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses. The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that messages received from other senses are often ignored if they conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be lemon-flavored,   and   if   it   is   grape-flavored,   many people
 	. Strawberry ice cream tinted with red food coloring seems to have a stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food coloring, even when there is no real difference.
① cannot correctly identify the flavor
② will not favor the grape-flavored candy
③ can clearly sense the difference in flavor
④ will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor
⑤ will enjoy the subtle difference between them







32. The Rust Belt is notorious for its poor air quality. For decades, coal plants, steel production, and auto  emissions  have pumped particulates like sulfate into the atmosphere over the eastern U.S. Especially before air quality laws began
33. 
Suppose a survivor from an airplane crash with severe injuries struggles for days through the jungle but dies just before reaching a village. It is tempting to think “if only he had managed to walk to the village, he would have been rescued.” But suppose you must try to console the victim’s relatives. What might you say? Or suppose you wish to defend the  rescue team who got as far as the  village  but  no  further.  Your motivation to console or defend may influence the alternative you imagine. You may decide to emphasize the severity of the victim’s injuries and suggest “even if he had managed to walk to the village, he still would have died.” Sometimes thoughts about what might have been change an
antecedent event (the victim walked to the village) but leave the outcome unchanged (he still died).  “Even  if...” conditionals have been called “semifactual” because they combine a counterfactual antecedent and a factual consequence. Imagined semifactual alternatives are intriguing because, unlike  other  thoughts  about  what  might  have  been,  they
suggest that 	. [3점]
① the consequence is unimaginable
② the antecedent is inevitable
③ the outcome is inevitable
④ the antecedent is unpredictable
⑤ the consequence is unpredictable




34. The so-called Mozart effect ― listening to Mozart will  make your child smarter ― is a good example of

appearing in the 1970s, particulate  pollution  was  behind acid	 	by the media

rain, respiratory disease, and ozone depletion. But a new study from Harvard University suggests that the Rust Belt’s thick particulate fog may have helped slow down the effects of climate change, particularly when it was thickest. Throughout the 20th century, global temperatures have gone up by just under one degree Celsius. But in the U.S., eastern and central states haven’t seen the same rise. In fact, temperatures there actually decreased over the same period. The reason seems to be particulate pollution. Instead of trapping warm air in the atmosphere like carbon dioxide, fine particles like sulfate reflect the sun’s light and heat. They may even group with watery cloud droplets, which do  the same thing. The effect   is 	.
* particulate: 분진, 미립 물질
① an  accumulation  of  carbon  dioxide
② a  net  cooling  across  entire  regions
③ a steep acceleration of global warming
④ a significant improvement in air quality
⑤ a slow but steady increase in temperatures

through hype not warranted by the research. It all started when researchers reported that after exposure to a selection of Mozart’s music, college students showed an increase in spatial reasoning for about 10 minutes on tasks like putting together pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Note first that the research was done on college students, not infants, and that the effect was very brief. In addition, no one’s been able to replicate the research. The increase in spatial reasoning, it turns out, can be generated by any auditory stimulation (e.g., listening to a short story or other types of music) that keeps people alert while being tested. However, none of this has stopped eager parents ― spurred on by fantastic claims from unethical companies ― from
purchasing Mozart CDs for their babies. [3점]
* hype: 과대 광고(선전)
① the bond between parents and children exaggerated
② a genuine scientific innovation being discarded
③ a scientific finding being distorted
④ the  correlation  between  reasoning  and  music  being rejected
⑤ the  convergence  of  music  and  physiology  made possible



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	영어 영역(B 형)


35. As the structures of our world and the conditions of certainty have yielded  to  an  avalanche  of  change,  the  extent   of   our   longing   for   stable,   definitive   leadership
 	. The fault lies not with leadership but rather with ourselves and our expectations. In the old days,  leaders  were  supposed  to  make sense of  chaos,  to  make  certainty  out  of  doubt,  and to create positive action plans for  the  resolution  of  paradoxes. Good leaders straightened things out.  Should  chaos rear its ugly head, the leader was expected to restore normality immediately. But  chaos  is  now  considered  normal, paradoxes cannot be resolved, and  certainty  is possible only to the level  of  high  probability.  Leadership  that attempts to deliver in terms of fixing any of these can
only fail. And that is exactly what is happening. [3점]
* an avalanche of: 많은, 쇄도하는
① can only be measured by our will to establish it
② has made traditional leadership more irreplaceable
③ can create viable action plans for restoring normality
④ has vastly reduced the probability of resolving paradoxes
⑤ has been exceeded only by the impossibility of finding it


[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. When a company comes out with a new product, its competitors typically go on the defensive, doing whatever
they can to        (A)        the odds that the offering will eat    into their sales. Responses might include increasing marketing efforts, offering discounts to channel partners, and even lobbying for regulations that would hinder the rival’s expansion. In many cases, though, such actions are misguided. Although the conventional wisdom that a rival’s launch will hurt profits is often correct, my research shows  that  companies sometimes see profits increase after a rival’s  launch. The underlying mechanism is pretty simple: When a company comes out with a new product, it often raises the prices of its existing products. This might be designed  to  make  the  new  product  look    (B)     and  thus  more attractive by comparison. As that company adjusts its pricing, its competitors can do the same without risking customer defections over price. [3점]
* defection: 이탈

(A) (B)
① calculate …… exceptional
② calculate …… more striking
③ eliminate …… more upgraded
④ reduce …… up-to-date
⑤ reduce …… cheaper
37. 
All human societies have economic systems within which goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed.
In one sense, the economic aspect of culture is simply the sum of the choices people make regarding these areas of  their  lives. These choices critically determine much of people’s lives.        (A)        ,  choosing  to  become  a  farmer  rather than an insurance broker may determine where you live, who you are likely to meet, the sorts of behaviors you  will  expect in your spouse and offspring, and so on. However, such  choices are not unlimited; rather, they are limited by our cultures, traditions, and  technologies.  (B)  ,  our  environments set the boundaries within which choices about the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services are made. To the extent that economic systems are  part of culture, people in different cultures have different sorts of economic behavior.

(A) (B)
① By contrast …… Consequently
② For example …… Conversely
③ For example …… Furthermore
④ Similarly …… Instead
⑤ Similarly …… Nevertheless




38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

(A) However, most organic farmers have no choice but to rely on chemicals as necessary supplements to their operations. With pests often consuming up to 40 percent of the crops grown in the United States, they do so as a matter of course.
(B) They might refer to these substances as “botanical extracts.” But according to Ned Groth, a senior scientist   at Consumers Union, these toxins “are not  necessarily  less worrisome because they are natural.”
(C) It is true that they are far more likely than conventional farmers to practice environmentally beneficial forms of biological control, and that they are also more likely to sensibly diversify their crops to reduce infestation.
* infestation: 횡행, 만연
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

영어 영역(B 형)	7

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



　Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to read,  he  seemed  to  get  bored  and  restless.  (  ① )  He soon
realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was
a kinesthetic learner. ( ② ) Once he figured this out,  he  started to use this information to his advantage. ( ③ ) He would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters,
and doodles. ( ④ ) He would act out things and work with other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ⑤ ) This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As
a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also went up.
* kinesthetic: 운동 감각의

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
























(A) (B)
① collective …… transmits
② creative	…… distributes
③ mental	…… modernizes
④ primitive	…… circulates
⑤ social	…… evaluates
41. 
윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① nature’s way of regulating population density
② the relationship between nutrition and reproduction
③ the significance of habitat protection for local ecosystems
④ the necessity of protecting the lake trout population
⑤ how to preserve various habitats for lake trout






42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① rise quickly
② be countless
③ remain steady
④ be unknown
⑤ fall to zero


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	영어 영역(B 형)


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　In Australia a few years ago, I met a remarkable man  named John Walton. He has since become a close friend. He told me that when he started out in life he seemed to be caught in a peculiar failure pattern. Whatever he tried would start out well and then end up badly. As a schoolboy he dropped out of several schools for this reason. He became convinced that it was his destiny in life to make good beginnings and then watch them fade away.

(A) 


(B) 
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)




44. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Stir Your Sleeping Creativity!
② The Cycle of Success and Failure
③ Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
④ Be Positive and Success Will Embrace You
⑤ Career Development: Investment for Your Life




45. 윗글의 John Walton에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 호주에서 필자(‘I’)를 만났다.
② 학창 시절에 여러 학교를 그만두었다.
③ 유명한 미국 회사의 호주 지사에 일자리를 얻었다.
④ 동기 부여 강연회의 연설자로 참석하였다.
⑤ New South Wales에 있는 지사의 매니저가 되었다.









(A) 







이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2013학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역(B형)

제 3 교시	
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 계절성 알레르기 예방법
② 봄맞이 대청소의 필요성
③ 실내 공기 오염의 심각성
④ 올바른 손 씻기의 중요성
⑤ 계절에 따른 차량 관리법

① I’m almost ready.
② I’ll see you at 3 p.m.
③ I wrote about camping.
④ We went there by train.
⑤ We should meet at school.

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.



7. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 청결한 두피 관리 요령
② 청소 시 환기의 필요성
③ 유리컵을 깨끗이 닦는 법
④ 요리에 양념을 넣는 순서
⑤ 페인트 붓의 다양한 종류

① I’ll take a rain check.
② It’s definitely not in there.
③ You bought it here last time.
④ You can find it on the Internet.
⑤ I’m looking forward to seeing you.




8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.


3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 시청
④ 서점

② 은행
⑤ 편의점

③ 학교

① I’ll let you know after I check.
② It’s very far from my school.
③ We need to buy tickets first.
④ I saw only half of the concert.
⑤ It’ll take a while to come back.


9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수습기자를 모집하려고
② 신문 구독을 권장하려고
③ 축하의 글을 공모하려고
④ 잡지 창간을 홍보하려고
⑤ 기념식 참가를 독려하려고


5. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 잇몸질환은 초기에 치료해야 한다.
② 정기적인 치과 검진이 필요하다.


10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

③ 칫솔을 완전히 건조시켜야 한다.
④ 식사 직후 양치하는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 칫솔을 자주 교체해야 한다.

① 포스터 붙여주기
③ 기차표 예매하기
⑤ 생일상 차려주기

② 캠페인 계획하기
④ 여행지 추천하기


	


영어 영역(B형)

11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to buy flowers
② to make a cake
③ to call her uncle
④ to give her a ride
⑤ to go to the hospital

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 세미나에 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 수업에 출석해야 해서
② 가족 모임에 가야 해서
③ 몸 상태가 좋지 않아서
④ 교수님과 약속이 있어서
⑤ 봉사활동을 신청해야 해서

13. 대화를 듣고, Anuta 섬에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오. [3점]
18. 
대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:  	
① Okay, I’ll drop it off there.
② Of course, you can do that.
③ Sorry, I can’t find your phone.
④ Sure, I’ll meet you at the station.
⑤ Alright, I’ll leave your book there.


19. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① I’ll grab a taxi for you.
② I’ll get you a sandwich.
③ Lunch is already served.
④ Lunch time starts in an hour.

① 위치
④ 인구

② 면적
⑤ 언어

③ 기후

⑤ The report is due at lunch time.


14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 남자에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① $54

② $55

③ $60

④ $95

⑤ $100

Jane: Excuse me, but  	
① are you going to get in?

15. Christine Book Event에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는
것을 고르시오.
① 5월 4일부터 10일까지 진행된다.
② Joe Christine의 책을 반값으로 판매한다.
③ 작가의 서명을 직접 받을 수 있는 기회가 있다.
④ 판매 수익은 어린이 박물관 건립에 사용된다.
⑤ 보다 많은 정보를 홈페이지에서 찾을 수 있다.

16. spotted salamander에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 크기가 대략 18cm이다.
② 밝은 노랑 또는 주황색 반점이 있다.
③ 거의 전 생애를 바위 밑이나 구멍에서 지낸다.
④ 낮에 주로 활동한다.
⑤ 물웅덩이 속에 알을 낳는다.

② is this going up or down?
③ am I late for the meeting?
④ could you press the button?
⑤ would you move in a little bit?


[21~22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① global popularity of biofuels
② depletion of natural resources
③ concerns over energy shortage
④ drawbacks related to fossil fuels
⑤ problems of alternative energies


22. biofuel에 관해서 언급되지 않은 것은? [3점]

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선택할 자동차를 고르시오.


①
②
③
④
⑤

① 종류
④ 생산량

② 원료
⑤ 효율성

③ 가격


	


영어 영역(B형)

23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 So many problems can be avoided by slowing down and carefully considering how to proceed in any given situation. In some instances, of course, there isn’t time to slow down and we have to just react. But generally we have more time than we allot ourselves to make decisions and draw conclusions. Slowing down provides time to consider how an issue has been framed and whether we have really considered all the relevant factors. We ought to pause for a moment in order to reconsider actions that could have serious consequences. Putting on the mental brakes can stop you, for example, from reacting in anger to someone on the road ― a situation that can lead to danger. If more of us would take just a couple extra moments to think an action through, we would all be much better off.
① 타인의 충고에 귀를 기울여라.
② 한 번에 한 가지 일에만 집중하라.
③ 현재의 주어진 상황에서 최선을 다하라.
④ 역경에 굴복하지 말고 도약의 기회로 삼아라.
⑤ 행동하기 전에 여유를 갖고 생각할 시간을 가져라.












24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 I have always believed your home tells your story. That tortoise shell on the wall? There was one exactly like it in my mother’s house and I can’t see it without thinking about a thousand family dinners. Those cuff links? They belonged to somebody I loved; we picked them out on one of the most perfect days we ever spent together. Each object tells a story and each story connects us to one another and to the world. The truth is, things matter. They have to. They are what we live with and touch each and every day. They represent what we have seen, who we have loved, and where we hope to go next. They remind us of the good times and the rough patches, and everything in between that has made us who we are.
① Things we live with are reflections of ourselves.
② Valuable things come when we don’t expect them.
③ Who we are is more important than what we have.
④ Various collections improve the quality of our lives.
⑤ Old memories matter in keeping social relationships.
25. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 According to the experts who are happiest in their careers, most people encounter turning points at which they have a clear choice. This choice is not, as you might think, “Should I stay or should I go?” It is often a decision about doing something new on the job: a training opportunity, an offer to take on new responsibilities, a chance to move into a new area with which one is unfamiliar. There are a host of possibilities, but the experts concur on this one point: say yes. As far as work is concerned, those experts can point to a decision where they were tempted to say no, where staying the course was more comfortable and less risky, but they finally decided to give it a go.
① Don’t Be Afraid to Say No
② Don’t Give Up, Hang in There!
③ Be Open to New Opportunities
④ Comfort: An Ultimate Goal in Life
⑤ Why Is Career Training Important?


26. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 Sonya asked for my advice about her five-year-old child’s separation anxiety. “Anna wants to be with me at all times,” she said. In Anna’s case, there was an early attempt to leave ① her at a nice, small preschool for half days. She seemed to enjoy the school, but was having a hard time departing from her mother in the morning. “She was fearful and clingy and, over time, ② she started to be more whiny at home and less happy,” her mother said. I suggested that ③ she stop taking her to preschool. The result was immediate and dramatic: “I got my child back,” Sonya said. “She is happy again and self-engaged, but ④ she is still unable to be away from me.” Anna will regain her trust and confidence. She needs time in which there is no reminder of ⑤ her experience of separation from her mother.
* whiny: 투덜대는

27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
 While digital production on tape has grown quickly and steadily, there are some notable holdouts in areas of production
① in which film is still largely preferred for image capture. Put simply, the picture on film still always looks better and more nuanced visually. Once ② captured on celluloid with the film look, such footage must then be transferred to a digital tape format for editing. High-end commercials for many products promoted across the nation, for example, still ③ are often shot on film. Here the preference for the film look in glossy national advertising campaigns ④ prevailing. Nonetheless, television producers have widely accepted that it is the use of camera lenses ⑤ that more fully determines the “look” of any picture than whether it is recorded digitally or on celluloid.


	


영어 영역(B형)

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
 Pay is most carefully considered when a person is applying for a job and considering an offer. In general, people ① accept offers where the monetary compensation is near the amount that they were hoping for. Over time, employees often expect to receive raises and/or bonuses, but these factors are not just about ② money. Employees want to be compensated fairly for their work. If they are taking on a heavier workload with more difficult projects, it is likely they would expect ③ inadequate compensation for their efforts. Part of this compensation could be monetary, but often times ④ recognition is just as important. People love to hear they have done a good job. A ⑤ promotion that includes a title change can be just as meaningful, if not more meaningful than an increase in salary.





29. 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The graph above shows the top five categories of U.S. consumer electronics sales and their share of total revenue in 2010 and 2011. ① PCs accounted for approximately 20 percent of total revenue, topping the share of total revenue both in 2010 and 2011. ② Video game hardware, however, represented the lowest percentage of revenue among the top five categories in 2011, though it had the third highest in the previous year. ③ One noticeable category, which saw the biggest increase in share of revenue, was tablets/e-readers, with its share more than doubling between 2010 and 2011. ④ Along with tablets/e-readers, mobile phones also gained an increased share in 2011, whereas the other three categories showed a decreased share. ⑤ TVs ranked the second highest in share of
30. 
Sybilla Masters에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 Sybilla Masters was the wife of a prominent Philadelphia merchant. She was also America’s first female inventor. In 1712, she invented a new way to grind corn into meal. Figuring that this was going to be the next big thing, she was determined to protect her idea. The State of Pennsylvania didn’t offer patents at the time, so she set sail for England. It took Sybilla several years to get what she came for. In the meantime, she opened a hat store to support herself in London. What Londoners thought of this energetic female inventor is largely unrecorded. But in November of 1715, the British government issued a patent to Thomas Masters for ‘a new invention found out by Sybilla, his wife.’ Even though it was her idea, and her years of effort that got the patent, the law required that it be issued in her husband’s name.
① 옥수수를 분쇄하는 새로운 방법을 고안했다.
② 펜실베이니아 주가 특허권을 주지 않아 영국으로 갔다.
③ 런던에서 생계를 유지하기 위해 모자 가게를 열었다.
④ 그녀에 대한 런던 사람들의 생각이 기록으로 많이 남아있다.
⑤ 영국 정부는 그녀의 남편에게 특허권을 발행했다.











[31~36] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Imagine that you are lying on a bed in a dental clinic. If you were told “only two times more” versus “only ten times more,” wouldn’t you use different mental strategies to try to cope? With either scenario, you would pull out the comforting thought of “only one more and then it’s the last one” at different times; you would save your most distracting fantasy for a different point. 	information lets us know what internal coping strategy is likely to work best during a stressor. A simple example: you have some minor surgery. You are told that on the first post-surgical day there is going to be a lot of pain, whereas by the second day, you will just feel a bit achy. Armed with that information, you are more likely to plan on watching distracting videos on the first day and to devote day two to writing poems.

revenue in 2010, and did the same in 2011 with only a small
decrease of 1.2%.

① Tentative
④ Subjective

② Deceptive
⑤ Alternative

③ Predictive





영어 영역(B형)

32. Dozens of studies have demonstrated the 	nature of self-supervision. For instance, people who were asked to make tricky choices and trade-offs ― such as setting up a wedding registry or ordering a new computer ― were worse at focusing and solving problems than others who had not made the tough choices. In one study, some people were asked to restrain their emotions while watching a sad movie about sick animals. Afterward, they exhibited less physical endurance than others who had let the tears flow freely. The research shows that we burn up self-control in a wide variety of situations: managing the impression we are making on others; coping with fears; controlling our spending; trying to focus on simple instructions such as “Don’t think of a white bear”; and many, many others. [3점]

34. Contentment is not supposed to be the same thing as apathy. Contentment is emotionally accepting your present as being what it is, without being filled with resentment, frustration, or irritation at anything you are undergoing. But that is thoroughly compatible with 	. You aspire to be better or to accomplish more. You are not satisfied to stay where you are existentially, with no further growth and no further effects for good on your world. You want to be and do more. This is the dissatisfaction of aspiration. It can be a very healthy goad to personal growth and fulfillment. As Saint Augustine put it, “Be always displeased at what you are, if you desire to attain to what you are not.” [3점]
* goad: 자극
① refusing to let negative emotions out

① nurturing
④ misleading

② hesitating
⑤ exhausting

③ rewarding

② acknowledging what you have achieved
③ wanting the future to be quite different
④ abandoning our efforts to make progress
⑤ recalling a pleasant moment from the past














33. Our health is certainly a matter of how we feel, but it is a lot more besides. We must always factor in 	. An individual may feel fine, but if significant others in his or her community keep saying things like, “You don’t seem like yourself,” or “Is there something wrong?” that person may feel impelled to go to the doctor to get checked out. The doctor, in turn, may perform various tests that indicate that there is, indeed, something wrong even if the person is as yet experiencing no overt symptoms. Once the doctor has confirmed one’s friends’ evaluation that something is wrong, the person is very likely to start feeling a lot less lively.
35. 
If you stand still in vertical rain, you will only get wet on top of your head, but once you start to move, your front starts getting wet as well. But, crucially, 	! Think about it this way: in every volume of space, there is a certain density of raindrops. Your front will meet that density of drops when you get to it no matter what your speed, so going more slowly does not help. It turns out that real-world effects do give runners a small increase in dampness ― maybe the air currents caused by running suck in more rain than they repel, or heavier footsteps cause more splashing ― but that is a drop in the bucket, so to speak, compared to the wetness you will prevent by getting to shelter quicker. [3점]

① what the people around us think
② how doctors react to our thoughts
③ the clear symptoms we often have
④ results of regular medical checkups
⑤ when others feel they are unhealthy

① there is no way for you to get to shelter
② you have to consider the direction of the wind
③ the density of raindrops affects walking speed
④ you don’t hit fewer raindrops by moving slower
⑤ wetness will be prevented by careful footsteps


	


영어 영역(B형)

36. We naturally think in terms of cause and effect. And this helps organize our experience of the world. We think of ourselves as seeing some things cause other things to happen, but in terms of our raw sense experience, we just see certain things happen before other things, and remember having seen such before-and-after sequences at earlier times. For example, a rock hits a window, and then the window breaks. We don’t see a third thing called causation. But we believe it has happened. The rock hitting the window caused it to break. But this is not experienced like the flight of the rock or the shattering of the glass. Experience does not seem to force the concept of causation on us. We just use it to interpret what we experience. Cause and effect are categories that could never be read out of our experience and must therefore be
 	to attribute such a connection.
[3점]
① learned from the accumulated knowledge of humankind
② made use of as compensation for our lack of imagination
③ clearly distinguished from each other as separate entities
④ brought to that experience by our prior mental disposition
⑤ considered as independent sensory experiences themselves
38. 
주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
 One of the most famous highway illusions, “motion parallax,” puzzled psychologists long before the car was invented. This phenomenon can be easily glimpsed when you look out the side window of a moving car.

(A) Obviously, we cannot make them move, no matter how fast we may drive. What is happening is that as we fixate on an object in that landscape, our eyes, to maintain their fixation, must move in a direction opposite to the way we are going.
(B) The foreground moves past very quickly, while trees and
other objects farther out seem to move by more slowly, and things far in the distance, like mountains, seem to move in the same direction as us.
(C) Wherever we fixate in that view, the things we see before the point of fixation are moving quickly across our retina opposite to the direction we are moving in, while things past the point are moving slowly across our retina in the same direction as we are traveling.
* retina: 망막

①  (A)-(C)-(B)
③ (B)-(C)-(A)
⑤ (C)-(B)-(A)

② (B)-(A)-(C)
④ (C)-(A)-(B)





37. 다음 글의 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

 Most people who work are used to setting and pursuing performance goals. Most workers will give you a blank stare if you ask what their learning goals are, or they will offer up a performance goal in disguise.   (A)    , “I would like to learn to make more money,” and “I would like to learn to break eighty in golf,” are simply performance goals with the word learning inserted. How does a learning goal differ from a performance goal? Performance is something you do that brings about an observable change in the external world. Learning,     (B)     , is a change that takes place within the learner, although often as a result of interaction with the external world. Thus a change in understanding based on new information or on a new interpretation of old information would be classified as learning.
(A) (B)
① However …… in fact
② However …… as a result
③ Moreover …… instead
④ For example …… in the same way
⑤ For example …… on the other hand



39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?


 For most athletes, maximum speed is reached between 40-60m. Once this is achieved, the challenge is to hold this speed for as long as possible. ( ① ) Young athletes may run with the belief that they will run faster and faster until they reach the finishing line. ( ② ) After 60m, all sprinters start to slow down. ( ③ ) At both maximum speed and decelerating speed, the challenge for the runner is to maintain their technique as long as possible. ( ④ ) Vigorous arm actions, powerful extensions of the rear leg, and applying sprinting forces through the ball of the foot will all help to hold the speed as long as possible. ( ⑤ ) Some people observe that great sprinters start to pull away from other runners toward the finishing line ― this is because these athletes are not slowing down as fast as their opponents.


	


영어 영역(B형)

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

[41~42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



$


(A) (B)
① identical …… selectively
② identical …… accidentally
③ distinct …… passively
④ proper	…… thoroughly
⑤ distinct …… purposely




41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Cultural Tolerance: A Way to True Success
② Company Culture: More than What It Seems
③ Widespread Misconceptions  about Autonomy
④ Through a Visible Rather than Invisible Hand
⑤ Diversity in a Company: Obligation or Option?










42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

① vulnerable
④ non-adaptive

② confidential
⑤ self-managing

③ hierarchical


	





[43~45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

영어 영역(B형)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)~(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?

(A)

① (a)

② (b)

③ (c)

④ (d)

⑤ (e)



45. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 수줍은 Lara를 보고 가여움을 느꼈다.
② Lara에게 다른 문화를 용인해야 한다고 말했다.
③ 선생님이 주신 주소로 Lara의 집을 찾아갔다.
④ 시간가는 줄 모르고 밤늦게까지 Lara와 얘기했다.
⑤ 학교에서 자신의 옆 자리가 비어 Lara가 앉았다.
(B) 

(C) 

(D) 

43. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서대로 바르게 배열한 것은?

① (B)-(D)-(C)
④ (D)-(B)-(C)

② (C)-(B)-(D)
⑤ (D)-(C)-(B)

③ (C)-(D)-(B)


	
2013학년도

3월 고3

전국연합학력평가 문제지


영어 영역(B형)	1
6. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.





1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.

① 대나무의 다양한 용도
② 판다의 수가 줄어드는 원인
③ 무분별한 삼림 개발의 위험성
④ 영화가 판다의 이미지에 미친 영향
⑤ 대나무 숲이 휴식 공간으로 인기 있는 이유

① You didn’t look nervous at all.
② I’m sorry you missed the concert.
③ I’d like to go to the concert with you.
④ I got an urgent call from my company.



7. 대화를 듣고, 고르시오.



두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을

⑤ I didn’t know your concert was yesterday.

① 기숙사 생활 예절
② 기숙사 생활의 단점
③ 기숙사비 인하의 필요성

2. 대화를 듣고,

남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장

④ 통학 시간을 절약하는 방법

적절한 것을 고르시오.

⑤ 가족과 함께 하는 식사의 중요성

① I’m going to water the plants.
② I’ll go get some empty boxes.
③ I’ll order soil for the planting.



8. 대화를 듣고,




두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.

④ Carrots and lettuce would be nice.
⑤ Children need to eat more vegetables.

① 팬 - 체조 선수
③ 강습생 - 수영 강사
⑤ 사진 기자 - 수영 선수

② 영화감독 - 배우
④ 리포터 - 구조 요원



3. 대화를 듣고,

여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장

적절한 것을 고르시오.

9. 대화를 듣고,

포스터 디자인에서 남자가 수정할 부분을 고르

① I tried to, but my cell phone was dead.
② Why didn’t you take the subway instead?
③ That’s terrible. Are the passengers all safe?
④ Don’t worry. The next train will come soon.
⑤ I was lucky to catch the train at the last minute.

시오.




4. 다음을 듣고, 고르시오.


남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을

① 역사 학습용 게임을 홍보하려고
② 강의의 개요와 목적을 설명하려고
③ 시험 준비 요령에 관해 조언하려고
④ 역사 유적 탐방 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 온라인 게임의 역사 왜곡에 대해 항의하려고




5. 대화를 듣고, 교내 영어 대회에 대한 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.


10. 대화를 듣고, 고르시오.


남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을

① 실시 분야를 늘려야 한다.
② 개최 시기를 늦춰야 한다.
③ 학년별로 나누어 실시해야 한다.
④ 심사 기준을 미리 공개해야 한다.
⑤ 학생을 심사 위원에 포함시켜야 한다.

① 학생 상담 센터 소개해 주기
② 안전 교육 자료 제작해 주기
③ 초등학교 소방 훈련 도와주기
④ 일일 교사 프로그램 참가하기
⑤ 소방서 견학 안내 책자 보내 주기




2	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

1 . 대화를 듣고,

여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을

18. 대화를 듣고,

여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장

고르시오.
① to make a dinner reservation

적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	

② to go out to get some food for her

① That’s good. I’d like to come at 5 p.m.

③ to proofread the presentation slides
④ to attend the seminar on behalf of her
⑤ to scan the photos for the presentation

② I see. What time is he going to come back?
③ Is he? How about taking him to the dentist?
④ The dentist will see you now. You can go in.
⑤ Right. I should have brushed my teeth regularly.

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를
고르시오.

① 미술 과제를 끝내지 못해서

19. 대화를 듣고,

남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장

② 가족사진을 찾으러 가야 해서
③ 비디오카메라를 빌리러 가야 해서
④ 할머니 생신잔치 준비를 해야 해서

적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:  	

⑤ 야구 경기 관람권을 구하지 못해서

① I’m sorry. I failed the interview yesterday.
② I know. I learned a lot from the internship.

13. 대화를 듣고, Greenworld Scholarship에 관해 두 사람이 언급 하지 않은 것을 고르시오.

③ I didn’t get information about the internship.
④ Thanks for encouraging me. I’ll try my best.
⑤ I always wanted to join the school drama club.

① 대상 학년
③ 성적 요건
⑤ 수여 금액

② 신청 기한
④ 제출 서류



20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Emily가 점원에게 할 말로 가장 적절한

14. 대화를 듣고,

여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오. [3점]

것을 고르시오.
Emily:  	

① $ 6

② $ 9

③ $ 10

④ $ 19

⑤ $ 21


① I already have a similar style.

15. 

Young Inventors’ Camp에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,

일치하지

② I’m looking for a dress like this.

않는 것을 고르시오.

③ I came to pick up the dress I ordered.
④ Will you come to the party next Saturday?

① 4월 첫째 주에 개최된다.
② 팀별로 발명품을 제작한다.
③ 우승팀은 국제 발명가 회의에 참석할 수 있다.
④ 유명 발명가의 초청 강연이 있다.
⑤ 전년도 참가자에게는 참가 우선권이 주어진다.

⑤ Can you show me another fashion magazine?

[21 ~ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.

16. 

winged bean에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,

일치하지

않는 것을

21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

고르시오. [3점]
① 덥고 습한 나라에서 잘 자란다.
② 거의 모든 부분을 먹을 수 있다.
③ 꽃을 익히면 시금치 맛이 난다.
④ 뿌리의 박테리아가 토양을 비옥하게 한다.
⑤ 단백질과 비타민의 공급원이다.

① types of skin­to­skin contact
② ways to raise a healthy baby
③ tips on how to breastfeed effectively
④ importance of early childhood education
⑤ influence of environment on intelligence



17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 로봇 청소기를
고르시오.
2 
. kangaroo care의 효과로 언급되지

않은 것은? [3점]

Robot Vacuum Cleaners

①
②
③
④
⑤

① 체중 증가
③ 체온 유지
⑤ 심장 박동 안정

② 숙면 유도
④ 면역 체계 강화




영어 영역(B형)	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　What would happen if you went to the soil and said, “Give me some fruit. Give me some plants”? The soil would probably respond, “Excuse me, sir, but you’re a little confused. You must be new here. That’s not the way the game is played.” Then it would explain that you should plant the seed. You take care of it. You water it and cultivate the soil. You fertilize it. You protect it and nurture it. Then, if you do it well, you will get your plant or your fruit sometime later. You could ask from the soil forever, but it wouldn’t change things. You have to keep giving, keep nurturing, for the soil to bear fruit ― and life is exactly the same way.
① 분수에 맞게 처신하라.
② 행동하기 전에 상황을 고려하라.
③ 효율적인 작업 방식을 계속 모색하라.
④ 서로에게 도움이 되는 방법을 찾으라.
⑤ 원하는 것을 얻으려면 먼저 노력을 기울이라.

25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　After witnessing an event, we are sometimes exposed to new information that can actually change our memory. What is known as the “post­event information effect” often results from our dialogues with other people. For example, an eyewitness to some event frequently discusses with others what they saw. In the aftermath of some event, the eyewitness and others may speculate as to exactly what happened, the sequence in which it occurred, and the degree to which various participants were involved. Rather than facilitating reproductive memory ― the accurate reproduction of some past event, an eyewitness’ dialogues with other people create reconstructive memory ― a reconstruction of the past which may be quite inaccurate because it responds more to considerations of plausibility than fact. Therefore, people can reconstruct inaccurate memories after witnessing some event as a result of discussing that event with other people.
* plausibility: 그럴듯함, 있음직함
① How Distortion of Memory Can Occur
② Why We Need to Reconstruct Our Memory
③ Relationship Between Intelligence and Memory
④ Reproductive Memory: A Source of Inspiration
⑤ Dialogue: An Integral Part of Accurate Memory











24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?

　When we furnish our rooms or fill our closets, we say “I want that,” but we also tell manufacturers “make more of that” ― setting in motion a whole process of extraction, production, distribution, marketing, and sales. In the process, we tell each other that this level of consumption is normal, natural, and good. Each of our decisions, therefore, is a case study in ethics, a determination about the nature of “the good life.” As we peruse the stuff available to us, we’re making judgements about which goods are good for us and why. We don’t think we’re engaged in ethical reflection, but we are deciding what we value, and how we will embody our values in the material world. Our rooms and our belongings send messages about identity and community, but they also express our ethical sensibilities, whether we like it or not.
① Where we live decides what we consume.
② What we buy reflects what we value in life.
③ Old things carry the memories of their owners.
④ Ethics rarely has an impact on consumer behavior.
⑤ Excessive spending goes against our ethical values.









26. 밑줄 친 he[him]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? John Boyle O’Reilly, poet, was one day walking along
Boylston street in Boston. A stranger who was approaching
① him from behind mistook him for a friend whom he had not seen for a long time. He slapped O’Reilly on the shoulder and greeted ② him heartily. Many men in O’Reilly’s place would have been annoyed and shown it, but not so the poet. Turning about, ③ he stretched out his hand. “I am not Jack,” said ④ he, “but I am glad to shake hands with any man who is as glad to see an old friend as you seem to be.” This handsome speech was a great relief to the stranger, who had been much embarrassed upon seeing an unknown face turned toward ⑤ him.




4	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,

어법상

틀린 것은? [3점]
29. 
다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

　The ‘Merton Rule’ was devised in 2003 by Adrian Hewitt, a local planning officer in Merton, southwest London. The rule, which Hewitt created with a couple of colleagues and persuaded the borough council to pass, ① was that any development beyond a small scale would have to include the capacity to generate ten percent of that building’s energy requirements, or the developers would be denied permission
② to build. The rule sounded sensible and quickly caught on, with over a hundred other local councils ③ followed it within a few years. In London, the mayor at the time, Ken Livingstone, introduced ‘Merton Plus,’ which raised the bar to twenty percent. The national government then introduced the rule more ④ widely. Adrian Hewitt became a celebrity in the small world of local council planning, and Merton council started winning awards for ⑤ its environmental leadership.
* raise the bar: 기준을 높이다



　The above graph shows six Olympians who won the most medals in the Summer Olympic Games. ① Michael Phelps of the USA is now the most decorated Olympian of all time with a total of 20 medals including 16 gold medals. ② Larisa Latynina of the USSR takes up the second place winning just two medals fewer than Phelps, but in terms of gold medals she is seven medals behind him. ③ After Latynina comes Nikolay Andrianov of the USSR with a total of 15 medals, two golds and one bronze fewer than Latynina. ④ Boris Shakhlin of the USSR, Edoardo Mangiarotti of Italy and Takashi Ono of Japan won the same number of medals, 13 medals each. ⑤ In terms of gold medals, however, Shakhlin won more than Mangiarotti or Ono, and he even won more than Andrianov, who won seven gold medals.




30. MacDowell Colony에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는





28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 않은 것은?





문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지

것은?
　The MacDowell Colony is an artists’ colony, located in Peterborough, New Hampshire, USA. The colony is designed to facilitate a balance between social interaction and focus on work. Private studios are available to artists 24 hours a

　Sometimes athletes need to be allowed to practice their skills on their own before they receive feedback. That way they can determine what is working and what isn’t and can become more ① mindful of their strengths and weaknesses. If you attempt to provide assistance when athletes would prefer to practice on their own, you may be ② wasting a lot of time and breath. When athletes realize that their best efforts are producing ③ satisfactory outcomes, they are usually more motivated to hear what you have to say. In other words, athletes are responsive to assistance when they fail to achieve

day, along with the dining and recreation rooms at Colony Hall. To ensure all colonists’ autonomy and privacy, no one may visit a studio without invitation. Breakfast and dinner are served in the dining room; lunch is delivered to each studio. After dinner, occasional presentations are a traditional, elective part of the stimulating and supportive environment. Friendships established among artists in residence often lead to collaborations and connections beyond the colony. The maximum length of residence is two months; the average stay is five to six weeks.

the outcome they were hoping for. A coach’s challenge, then,

① 개인 스튜디오가 하루

24시간 이용 가능하다.

is to remain patient until these and other types of ④ teachable moments arise. The reward for such ⑤ patience is athletes who are motivated to hear what you have to say and eager to

② 초대가 없으면 스튜디오를 방문할 수 없다.
③ 점심 식사가 각 스튜디오로 배달된다.
④ 저녁 식사 후에 이따금씩 발표회가 열린다.

incorporate your suggestions.

⑤ 평균 거주 기간이

2개월이다.




영어 영역(B형)	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[31 ~ 36]  다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을  고르시오.
31. When we are children, our bodies grow automatically. A year goes by, and we become taller, stronger, more capable
of doing new things and facing new challenges. I think many people carry into adulthood a subconscious belief that mental, spiritual, and emotional growth follows a similar pattern. Time goes by, and we simply get better. We’re like Charlie Brown in Charles Schulz’s Peanuts comic strip, who once said, “I think I’ve discovered the secret of life ― you just hang around until you get used to it.” The problem is that we don’t improve by simply living. We have to be
 	 about it. Musician Bruce Springsteen commented, “A time comes when you need to stop waiting for the man you want to become and start being the man you want to be.” No one improves by accident. Personal growth doesn’t just happen on its own.

3 . Can you recall what you bought for your dinner on the
same day last month? Probably not. How about this then: herdsmen of the Swazi tribe of East Africa are able to remember in great detail each cow or bull bought a year ago, including who sold the animal, whether it was a bull, a cow, or a calf, its age and appearance, and what it was bartered for. Impressive, huh? Cattle have tremendous social and economic importance in the Swazi tribe. When the psychologist Barlett tested these same men on other kinds of detail, their memory wasn’t better than the average person’s. The conclusion we can draw from this is that we tend to 	.
* barter: 물물교환하다
① follow others’ opinions
② stick to what we believe
③ expect our future positively
④ learn better by imitating others

① content
④ thankful

② defensive
⑤ self­confident

③ intentional

⑤ remember what matters most to us
























32. Table manners help us to see that politeness is not, after all, a disadvantage. Although the ill­mannered person can
grab more of the food, he will receive less of the affection; and fellowship is the real meaning of the meal. Next time, he will not be invited. Politeness makes you a part of things and so gives you an enduring edge over those who never acquired it. And this gives us a clue to the real nature of rudeness: to be rude is not just to be selfish, in the way
34. 
Aristotle learned a lesson in wisdom in fourth­century B.C. Athens, watching the carpenters, shoemakers,  blacksmiths,
and boat pilots. Their work was not governed by systematically applying rules or following rigid procedures. The materials they worked with were too irregular, and each task posed new problems. Aristotle thought the choices craftsmen made in acting on the material world provided clues to the kind of know­how citizens needed to make moral choices in the social world. Aristotle was particularly fascinated with how the masons on the Isle of Lesbos used rulers. A normal, straight­edged ruler was of little use to the masons who were carving round columns from slabs of stone and needed to measure the circumference of the columns. Unless you bent the ruler. Which is exactly what the masons did. They fashioned a flexible ruler out of lead, a forerunner of today’s tape measure. For Aristotle, knowing

that	children	(until	taught	otherwise)	and	animals	are	 	was exactly what practical wisdom was all

instinctively selfish; it is to be 	. Even in the friendliest gathering, the rude person will reveal, by some

about. [3점]


* circumference: 원의 둘레

word or gesture, that he is not really part of it. Of course he is there, a living organism, with wants and needs. But he does not belong in the conversation. [3점]

① how to bend the rule to fit the circumstance
② what to do to relieve stress from work
③ when to stop and when to begin

① clever
④ impatient

② alone
⑤ curious

③ talkative

④ where to apply rigid procedures
⑤ whom to help with one’s skills




6	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

35. In one experiment researchers had people sit at computers

37. 다음 글의 빈칸

(A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

and review two online articles describing opposing theories of learning. One article laid out an argument that “knowledge is objective”; the other made the case that “knowledge is relative.” Each article was set up in the same way, with similar headings, and each had links to the other article, allowing a reader to jump quickly between the two to compare the theories. The researchers hypothesized that people who used the links would gain a richer understanding of the two theories and their differences than would people who read the pages sequentially, completing one before going on to the other. They were wrong. The test subjects who read the pages linearly actually scored considerably higher on a subsequent comprehension test than those who clicked back and forth between the pages. 	, the researchers concluded.
① The links helped to organize information
② Using the links got in the way of learning
③ Attitude is more important than knowledge
　
When	scientists	created	a	hunk	of	mass	called	the international prototype kilogram(IPK), and distributed about
40 of these prototype kilograms to other countries, they realized contaminants could coat the kilogram’s surface. To try to counteract this effect, they made the masses into cylinders, which have less surface area to acquire dust and debris. (A) , the fundamental unit of mass has gained tens of micrograms of mass from surface contamination. A skilled technician will rub the cylinders with alcohol, but because every country cleans their kilograms differently and at different times, each kilogram in the world is off by a different, unknown amount.   (B)   , each country that has one of these standard masses has a slightly different definition of the kilogram, which could throw off science experiments that require very precise weight measurements or international trade in items that are highly restricted by weight.	* IPK: 국제 킬로그램 표준기
(A) (B)

④ The more links, the higher level of popularity
⑤ The Web motivates people to read more articles

① In addition
② In addition
③ Nevertheless
④ Nevertheless
⑤ In other words

For example
On the contrary As a result Likewise Furthermore










36. For a hunter­gatherer ancestor, it would have been useful to make plans and be able to follow through with them. It might be very advantageous to carefully and deliberately
develop skills in tool­making, a development whose pay­off might be years away, rather than just try to use whatever can be grabbed when a tool is needed. However, much of hunter­gatherer life is unplannable because of events. It would really not be a good response, observing a passing herd of wildebeest, to say, “Actually, Wednesday is my honey­gathering day.” Life for a hunter­gatherer would be a series of urgent improvisations on the stimuli occurring right now, be they passing prey, the lack of passing prey, attacks by others, changes in the make­up of the group, or countless other  possibilities.  People   would   do   well who  could
 	 and quickly mobilize an energetic, spontaneous, physical response to whatever happened to turn up. [3점]
① decide to work independently
② choose wise leaders to guide them
38. 
주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

(A) They also believed he was strongly pro­union and resisted providing information that could help supervisors run the plant during a strike. These assumptions were dashed when a foreman asked the mechanic why he wasn’t writing things down.
(B) His answer was simple: He felt he had lousy penmanship and was ashamed to have his writing on display. Snare concludes, “Walk around, look, ask questions. Asking questions is the best source of information, yet it is the least used.”
(C) Veteran project manager Paul Snare tells how, in a big diaper plant in Michigan, supervisors believed their best mechanic wasn’t documenting his work because he wanted to maintain an information edge over coworkers.

③ abandon plans at the moment’s notice
④ follow the footsteps of their ancestors
⑤ make a lot of friends in their line of work

① (A) - (C) - (B)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

② (B) - (A) - (C)
④ (C) - (A) - (B)




영어 영역(B형)	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,
곳은?

주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한

[41 ~ 42]

다음 글을 읽고,

물음에 답하시오.



　I look for lip compression or disappearing lips during interviews	or	when	someone	is	making	a	declarative
statement. ( ① ) This is such a reliable cue that it will
show up precisely at the moment a difficult question is
asked. ( ② ) If you see it, that doesn’t necessarily mean the
person is lying. ( ③ ) For example, if I ask someone, “Are
you hiding something from me?” and he compresses his lips
as I ask the question, he is hiding something. ( ④ ) This is
especially accurate if it is the only time he has concealed or
compressed his lips during our discussion. ( ⑤ ) It is a
signal that I need to push further in questioning this person.








40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

빈칸 (A)와












41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① Accuracy: The Power of News Stories
② Bad News Travels Faster than Good News
③ The Closer to the Reader, the More Newsworthy
④ Sports News: The Most Popular News Category
⑤ Popularity Is Not a Goal in News Reporting



?
(A)	(B)

① messiness
② messiness
③ decoration

simplicity security attention


42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?

④ decoration
⑤ temperature

perfection relaxation

① localize
④ distribute

② update
⑤ collect

③ summarize



8	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[43 ~ 45]

다음 글을 읽고,

물음에 답하시오.
43. 
주어진 글

(A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로

(A)

가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)


② (C) - (B) - (D)
④ (D) - (B) - (C)











4 . 밑줄 친 것은?

(a)~(e)

중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른

(B)

① (a)

② (b)

③ (c)

④ (d)

⑤ (e)











45. 위 글의

Sylvia Sebring에 관한 내용과 일치하지

않는 것은?

① 부상당한 말이 나오는 꿈을 여러 번 꾸었다.
② 구조된 말을 Marana Stockyards에서 보았다.



(C)

③ Dream Walker의 주인이 되었다.
④ 부상당한 말을 구조하기 위해 사막에 갔다.
⑤ 구조된 말이 경매될 것임을 알게 되었다.

















(D)



2013학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역(B형)	1

6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 숙소 선정 시 고려할 점	② 다양한 숙박 시설의 장단점
③ 여행 경비를 아끼는 요령	④ 안전한 여행을 위한 유의점

1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I’ll turn it off when I leave home.
② Sure, but not until I finish my homework.
③ Okay, but only after watching this program.
④ Oh, I didn’t realize I fell asleep on the sofa.
⑤ No, I don’t like watching TV before going to bed.


2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① My dog always listens to me.
② You don’t have to reward him.
③ He needs to be treated by a vet.
④ A pat on the head would be enough.
⑤ Ask the trainer how to stop his bad habits.


3. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① They’ll let us know when he’ll come.
② The washing machine is working now.
③ I’m afraid we’ll have to hand wash them.
④ You should go pick them up from the laundry.
⑤ The technician will come fix the machine today.


4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 마술 대회 참가를 권유하려고
② 대중교통 생활화를 권장하려고
③ 열차 운행 시간 변경을 알리려고
④ 열차 디자인 아이디어를 공모하려고
⑤ 열차 내 특별 행사에 관해 안내하려고


5. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 인터넷을 통한 가족 역사 찾기
② 온라인으로 맺는 인간관계의 한계
③ 인터넷이 가족 관계에 미치는 영향
④ 소셜 네트워크의 효과적 활용 방안
⑤ 인터넷을 활용한 다양한 역사 학습 방법

⑤ 관광지 정보를 얻는 방법




7. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 외식을 줄이면 가정 경제에 도움이 된다.
② 작은 그릇을 이용하면 과식을 예방할 수 있다.
③ 가족의 수가 많으면 요리 준비를 분담할 수 있다.
④ 요리의 가짓수를 줄이면 음식물 쓰레기를 줄일 수 있다.
⑤ 음식물 쓰레기 배출에 부과하는 요금을 인상할 필요가 있다.




8. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 의사 - 환자	② 영화감독 - 배우
③ 안무가 - 무용수	④ 패션 디자이너 - 모델
⑤ 옷 가게 점원 - 손님




9. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고 르시오.














10.대화를  듣고,  남자가  여자를  위해  할  일로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 치즈 케이크 사다 주기	② 요리 재료 준비하기
③ 자동차 열쇠 찾아 주기	④ 손님들에게 연락하기
⑤ 제과점 위치 알려 주기


	

2	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

1.대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오.
① to come to his rock concert
② to be a judge in the contest
③ to lend rock & roll music CDs
④ to give a music lesson to his band
⑤ to help select a song for the contest

12.대화를 듣고,  여자가 권투 시합에 출전하지 않는 이유를 고르 시오.
① 체중 관리에 실패해서	② 훈련 기간이 부족해서
③ 시합 일정이 변경되어서	④ 라이벌이 출전하지 않아서
⑤ 학교 대표로 선발되지 못해서

13.대화를  듣고,  작품에  관해  두  사람이  언급하지  않은  것을  고 르시오.
① 작가	② 제목	③ 제작 기법
④ 실물 크기	⑤ 전시 장소

14.대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90	② $100	③ $110	④ $120	⑤ $130

15. Beaver County College Fair에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10월 24일에 2시간 동안 개최된다.
② 참가비는 무료이나 미리 등록을 해야 한다.
③ 100개가 넘는 학교에서 진학 정보를 제공한다.
④ 모든 연령의 학생들이 참여할 수 있다.
⑤ 방문객은 캠퍼스에 도착하면 안내를 받게 된다.

16. Reichstag 건물에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 베를린에 있는 독일 의회 건물이다.
② 19세기에 화재로 많은 부분이 파손되었다.
③ 제2차 세계대전 이후 서독에 속하게 되었다.
④ 1990년대에 대대적으로 수리되었다.
⑤ 돔의 유리 바닥을 통해 건물 내부를 내려다 볼 수 있다.

17.다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  두  사람이  주문할  텐트를  고 르시오.
Yellow Creek Outdoor Tents


①

②

③

④

⑤

18.대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① She’ll be waiting for you at the train station.
② Yes, you can call her and cancel the meeting.
③ Okay, but make sure you clean your room later.
④ I’ll give you a ride to the airport after I finish cleaning.
⑤ Since you’re done with your job, you can come with me.


19.대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① Don’t worry. I won’t say anything until they do.
② Sure. I’ll remember to buy a dress for the party.
③ Sorry. I forgot that I’d heard about their engagement.
④ You could’ve told me earlier that we were eating out.
⑤ Everybody knows the party will be held tomorrow night.


20.다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Mark가 Harry에게 할 말로 가장 적절  한 것을 고르시오.
Mark:  	
① I also want to try out for the basketball team.
② I’m afraid the coach is moving to another school.
③ Playing basketball will make you taller and healthier.
④ You played a major role in our team’s winning the game.
⑤ I’m sure you’re the very player our coach is looking for.





[21 ~ 22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21.남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the advantages of indoor farms
② pros and cons of organic farming
③ the influence of weather on farming
④ various types of farms in the urban area
⑤ the superiority of traditional farms to modern farms


2.농장에서 기를 수 있는 것으로 언급되지 않은 것은?
① 꽃	② 벼	③ 오리	④ 딸기	⑤ 물고기


	

영어 영역(B형)	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

23.다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Common wisdom states, “If it tastes good, it’s not good for you.” It also says, “If you get to eat the foods you like, you’re not dieting.” There is no evidence to support these claims. In fact, many diets fail due to this attitude. When dieting, there is no reason that the foods have to taste bad. I knew a bodybuilder who used to mix tuna, water, and protein powder in a blender for lunch. His idea was that food didn’t need to taste good; what really mattered was getting nutrients. That mentality may work for some. But if you tell the majority of people that their food must be dull or that they can’t ever eat what they like, you are setting them up for failure. Flavor in the diet helps to ensure success as long as the flavor is not pushing you over your calorie budget.
① 건강 보조 식품에 지나치게 의존해서는 안 된다.
② 다이어트를 위한 음식이 맛이 없을 필요는 없다.
③ 다이어트 중에도 단백질 섭취를 충분히 해야 한다.
④ 음식을 선택할 때 맛보다 영양을 우선 고려해야 한다.
⑤ 체중 조절을 위해서 운동과 식이요법을 병행해야 한다.
















24.다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
 The psychological advice warns us most often about the limits of argumentation in dealing with another person and the truth at the same time. As Sir Thomas Browne once warned, in all disputes, the more passion there is, the less purpose there is. Debate, you often hear, typically generates more heat than light. Passion clouds reason. And in the context of an interpersonal argument, or debate, people sometimes are willing to do anything to save face. Joseph Addison once observed, “Our rivals in debates put me in the mind of the cuttlefish that, when he is unable to protect himself, blackens the water about him till he becomes invisible.” So, as Publilius Syrus concluded long ago, in a heated argument, we are apt to lose sight of the truth.
① the difficulty of seeing the truth during a heated debate
② the importance of truly listening to others in a debate
③ the rules to keep in mind for a successful research
④ the ways to win a debate without hurting others
⑤ the process of drawing a reasonable conclusion

25.다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 There is one realm where few have sought inspiration for our dilemma about how to live: history. I believe that the future of the art of living can be found by gazing into the past. If we explore how people have lived in other epochs and cultures, we can draw out lessons for the challenges and opportunities of everyday life. What secrets for living with passion lie in medieval attitudes towards death, or in the pin factories of the industrial revolution? How might an encounter with Ming­dynasty China, or Central African indigenous culture, change our views about bringing up our kids and caring for our parents? It is astonishing that, until now, we have made so little effort to unveil this wisdom from the past, which is based on how people have actually lived rather than utopian dreamings of what might be possible.
① The Museum as Living History
② History: A Fountain of Insights
③ No Future, No Past, Only Present
④ The Pursuit of Historical Accuracy
⑤ Historical Drama: Fiction or Non­fiction?




















26.밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 Inside the compound, just beyond the gates, in the admissions tent, Dr. Milton Tectonidis examines a two­year old boy clinging to his mother’s breast. “He’s quite dehydrated,” ① he says, “so I’ll keep him here.” He gently pinches the skin of the child’s left arm to check if the skin comes back. The boy’s name is Rashidu. ② His eyes are wide, and he looks right at Dr. Tectonidis. In his native Canada, Dr. Tectonidis might be mistaken for a drifter. His long hair is uncombed; ③ his thin body swims in the white T­shirt he always wears. He has worked with Doctors Without Borders for more than a dozen years, and in as many countries. ④ He has treated tens of thousands of children, perhaps hundreds of thousands. He’s lost count of how many ⑤ he has saved.
* compound: (난민) 수용소


	

4	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

27.다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
 With all the passion for being slim, it is no wonder ① that many people view any amount of visible fat on the body as something to get rid of. However, the human body has evolved over time in environments of food scarcity; hence, the ability to store fat ② efficiently is a valuable physiological function that served our ancestors well for thousands of years. Only in the last few decades, in the primarily industrially developed economies, ③ have food become so plentiful and easy to obtain as to cause fat­related health problems. People no longer have to spend most of their time and energy ④ gathering berries and seeds and hoping that a hunting party will return with meat. All we have to do nowadays is drive to the supermarket or the fast­food restaurant, ⑤ where for very low cost we can obtain nearly all of our daily calories.
















28.(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적 절한 것은?
 When two monkeys are trapped together in a small cage, they try everything they can to (A) prevent / start a fight. Moving with caution and suppressing any behaviors that could trigger aggression are good short­term solutions to the problem. The monkeys sit in a corner and avoid any random movements; even a brief touch could be interpreted as the beginning of (B) generous / hostile action. Mutual eye contact is also dangerous because, in monkey language, staring is a threat. The monkeys look up in the air or at the ground, or stare at some imaginary point outside the cage. But as time passes, sitting still and pretending (C) authority / indifference are no longer sufficient strategies to keep the situation under control. To avoid aggression and to reduce stress, an act of communication is needed to make it clear to the other monkey that no harm is intended.
(A) (B)	(C)
① prevent	generous	authority
② prevent	hostile	authority
③ prevent	hostile	indifference
④ start	hostile	indifference
⑤ start	generous	authority

29.다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?















 The graph above shows the percentage of people holding a driving license within age groups by gender in Scotland in 2011. ① In total, a higher proportion of males (76%) held a license compared to females (60%), and in each age group the percentage of males was higher than that of females. ② The percentage of license holders for males in the 35 to 44 age group was exactly the same as that for males in the 45 to 59 age group. ③ The percentage of females holding a license peaked in the 35 to 44 age group. ④ The percentage gap between male and female license holders was the biggest in those aged 75 and over. ⑤ On the other hand, the percentage gap between male and female license holders was the smallest in the 25 to 34 age group.

30. Joseph H. Pilates에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 Joseph H. Pilates was born in Germany in 1880 and was a weak child with asthma who was determined to be strong. He was imprisoned in England during World War I because of his German citizenship. While in England, he became a nurse and began designing exercise apparatus for immobilized hospital patients. The devices and exercises became the foundation for his method of body conditioning and strengthening. In 1926, he moved to New York City and opened his first Pilates Studio. The body building and fitness techniques he developed became widely used all over the world by dancers, actors, sports teams, spas, and fitness enthusiasts. Dancers such as Martha Graham and George Balanchine were among the first to adopt his fitness techniques. Today, his exercises are recommended by physical therapists as part of an overall program of rehabilitation for patients who have suffered stress injuries.
① 어린 시절에 몸이 허약했다.
② 영국에서 투옥된 적이 있다.
③ 거동을 못하는 환자들을 위한 운동 기구를 고안했다.
④ 뉴욕시에서 Pilates Studio를 열었다.
⑤ 개발한 운동 기법이 무용수들에게 외면당했다.


	

영어 영역(B형)	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[31 ~ 35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The person who relates to certain individuals as family members or friends to the exclusion of others does not affirm that those to whom he relates are better persons. He affirms only that they are his relatives or friends. When a new father
tells his two­week­old daughter that she is the “cutest little girl in town,” he is not informing the infant that she would win a beauty contest of girls of her age before a fair panel of judges. He is, more than anything else, telling her that she is his little girl. The same is true in general when people assert that their spouses, their parents, and their sons and daughters are “the best.” The highest praises are used to indicate that certain persons 	.
① will have to be independent early
② are to be under extreme pressure
③ are the target of others’ criticism
④ are the specific objects of affection
⑤ have a network of many influential people









32. Some social critics would argue that the move toward an increasingly isolated individualism had been underway for
some time ― at least since the middle of the twentieth century, when psychoanalysis had infused the ideal of individual self­making with a new psychological component. Emotional well­being, the subjective experience of happiness, and the pursuit of pleasure, rather than, say, the accumulation of wealth, community involvement, and moral virtue, began to be equated with success. This focus on self­fulfillment constituted a departure from the traditional criteria for evaluating success. While the self­made man of the nineteenth and early­twentieth centuries aimed to achieve success in terms that were largely external and measurable (for example, accumulation of wealth, status, or power), late­twentieth century self­making involves the pursuit of the rather more elusive and variable state of self­fulfillment. With the emergence of an emphasis on self­fulfillment, one finds there is no end­point for self­making: individuals can 	. [3점]
* infuse: 주입하다, 불어넣다
① see the world in a more conservative perspective
② contribute to the preservation of traditional cultures
③ help their team reach the common goals in a proper way
④ compete against other strong opponents for the top positions
⑤ continuously pursue shifting and subjective criteria for success

3.Until J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series set in motion an
extraordinary child­to­adult crossover craze that took the entire world by storm, books generally crossed over in the opposite direction. Children 	. In fact, this type of readership transgression has been going on almost as long as books have existed. Many of the world’s great classics were appropriated very early on by children, even though they were not written with young readers in mind. Some works very quickly assumed the status of crossover works. A number of them became almost the sole property of children, a prime example being Daniel Defoe’s  Robinson       Crusoe,                 which  is  read  by  children  around the world, but very rarely by adults in any country. First published in 1719, Defoe’s most celebrated work was not meant for children, but became a classic of children’s literature and inspired countless adaptations and edited versions. [3점]
* transgression: 침범
① have lost interest in literature
② have ventured into writing stories
③ have long laid claim to adult fiction
④ have been characterized in many novels
⑤ have been protected from the cruel world











34. Horseshoe crabs have copper in their blood that makes the blood turn royal blue in the air. The odd­colored blood has
an amazing trait. It detects bacteria (germs) and forms a clot. In the 1960s, scientists invented a test using horseshoe blood to detect endotoxins, the chemical poisons some bacteria make, in human medicines. Just a tiny amount of endotoxins in a person’s bloodstream can cause dangerous fevers and even death. To test if a drug is clean of bacteria or endotoxins, the drug is mixed with an extract from horseshoe blood, called Limulus lysate. If a  jellylike  clot forms, the drug is not safe. The Limulus lysate test is quick and can detect even the tiniest amount of endotoxins. It is used worldwide to check if medicines, blood donations, and medical supplies are clean and safe. Every year, the extraordinary blue bloods 	.
* clot: (피의) 엉긴 덩어리
① are polluted with heavy metals
② produce harmful bacteria
③ are in low demand
④ save thousands of human lives
⑤ are used to remove blood clots


	

6	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

35. No animal surpasses humans in 	,
and we’ve been doing it for a long time. The “Iceman,” whose 5,200­year­old corpse was discovered on a glacier on the Italian­Austrian border, had stuffed grasses into his shoes to keep his feet warm and was carrying a sloe berry. Human transport of plants increased abundantly as our transportation technology developed. People transported and introduced some non­native species intentionally, for food, fiber, medicine, ornament or scientific curiosity. Seeds of other plants were introduced accidentally in sacks of seed grain, wool or cotton, or in mud stuck to machinery. Human activities like farming, irrigation, forestry and mining have made it easier for these non­native species to become established by removing native vegetation, disturbing the soil and altering the availability of water and nutrients.
① fighting colds	② dispersing plants
③ sharing resources	④ protecting habitats
37. 
An automobile is a commodity that can be relocated
anywhere. Its value is determined by the supply and demand for a particular model, based on upgrades and condition. (A) ,  if  two  2004  Speero  cars  were available for sale and had identical upgrades and mileage, the vehicle in poorer condition would be priced lower. A home’s value is also determined by the supply and demand for the home, based on the model of the home, upgrades, and the current state of the home ― in other words, whether it is in good shape. But there is one large difference between a car and a home. A home cannot travel. It is firmly rooted where it is built.  (B)   , a  home’s value, unlike the automobile’s, is as dependent on its location as on its characteristics and amenities. Even if a home is in excellent condition, if the neighborhood in which it resides deteriorates, so will the value of the home.

⑤ running a long distance


(A) (B)
① By contrast	That is
② By contrast	Likewise
③ For example	Thus
④ For example	On the contrary
⑤ Similarly	Conversely

* amenities: 편의 시설




[36 ~ 37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.“Sand,”  “rich,”  “oil,”  and “Bedouin”  are all  stereotypes  about Arabs. Some people imagine the Arab World as a giant
desert, with cities and villages scattered randomly throughout. Though a conventional image of many people, this is, of course,  a very   (A)     picture of the region. There are  vast deserts in the Arab World, and in parts of those deserts Bedouins and nomads live. However, supposing that this predominates would be like saying that the United States is made up of country towns run by cowboys. The topography and climate of  the  Arab  World  are  as  (B)   as  its people. There are beaches, dense forests, mountains that are snowcapped year­round, large metropolises, and every imaginable climate. Moreover, not every Arab country possesses oil. There are potentially more oil reserves in Alaska than in Saudi Arabia. The stereotype of the oil­rich Arab leads to assumptions of the financially rich Arab. There are rich Arabs just as there are rich Americans and other rich people all over the world. [3점]
* topography: 지형
(A)	(B)
① incomplete	diverse
② incomplete	monotonous
③ precise	diverse
④ detailed	monotonous
⑤ detailed	unfamiliar






38.주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]

 If you are intrigued by the emotional effect of movies through sensory input, try an experiment that researchers have performed in a more precise fashion.

(A) Afterwards watch it one more time with the sound turned on. Compare how this film sequence impacts you differently with and without music. Most likely you will find the difference in emotional impact amazing.
(B) If one of these scenes has minimal or no dialog but intense music, stop and rewind the tape to the beginning of the sequence, take a ten­minute break, and watch it again, this time with no sound.
(C) Rent a movie that has affected you emotionally in the past. It might have made you feel joyful, open­hearted, inspired, scared, or sad. As you watch the movie, notice which scenes affect you strongly.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)


	

영어 영역(B형)	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

39.글의  흐름으로  보아,  주어진  문장이  들어가기에  가장  적절한
곳은?

[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



 When faced with a bunch of watermelons, all promising delicious juiciness inside, how do you know which one to pick? ( ① ) It is suggested that you skip the tapping and instead check the bottom of the watermelon. ( ② ) Tapping a watermelon like a bongo might work for some people, but it’s too subjective. ( ③ ) And there’s no agreement on whether a watermelon is supposed to sound “solid” or “tight” or even make a b­flat sound. ( ④ ) This is where the watermelon sat on the ground while it soaked up the sun at the farm. ( ⑤ ) If this spot is white or greenish, your watermelon may have been picked too soon and might not be as ripe as it should be.


40.다음  글의  내용을  한  문장으로  요약하고자  한다.  빈칸  (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]


















?




(A) (B)
① creative	imitate
② fresh	focus on
③ opposite	be independent of
④ similar	focus on
⑤ dominant	be independent of


41.윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① what made camping popular
② the origin of eco­friendly camping
③ the spirit of adventure nurtured by camping
④ basic necessities for camping on the mountains
⑤ what to consider when choosing good campsites








42.윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① idealized	② ignored	③ isolated
④ criticized	⑤ classified


	

8	영어 영역(B형)
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)














(B) 












(C) 

43.주어진  글  (A)에  이어질  내용을  순서에  맞게  배열한  것으로
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)








4.밑줄 친 (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)








45.윗글의 Tina에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 항상 밝은 미소로 사람들을 대했다.
② 과제 평가에서 10점 만점을 받았다.
③ 과제에 대해 걱정하는 기색을 보였다.
④ 몸이 불편해서 벌칙을 수행하지 않았다.
⑤ 시를 암송할 때 처음에는 실수를 했다.














(D) 

	
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1







1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Right. We need to get a new fridge.
② Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
③ Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
④ Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
⑤ Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.

2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
② Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
③ It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done.
④ Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next.
⑤ Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.

3. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① It’s hard to endure the loss of a cherished puppy.
② You shouldn’t have taken your eyes off the road.
③ You should break the habit of being late all the time.
④ Don’t worry. You can do it if you put your mind to it.
⑤ What a coincidence! I was about to drop by your house.

4. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
② 요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고
③ 주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고
④ 체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고
⑤ 새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고

5. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비
② 배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법
③ 선상 화재의 주된 원인
④ 연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류
⑤ 배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령




6. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
② 컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
③ 컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
④ 컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
⑤ 컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계


7. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
② 장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
③ 장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
④ 장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
⑤ 장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.



8. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.

















9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 서점 직원 － 고객	② 연극 연출가 － 배우
③ 동화 작가 － 독자	④ 도서관 사서 － 학생
⑤ 출판사 편집장 － 삽화가


10. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수업 참관하기
② 만화 그려 주기
③ 팸플릿 복사하기
④ 읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤ 현장 학습 일정표 만들기




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


11. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to participate in the meeting to talk about the matter
② to install a device in the car to record accidents
③ to repair the damaged car before she gets back
④ to prepare for a business trip with her customer
⑤ to watch the security video to find who hit the car

12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 head chef에 지원하지 못하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서
② 기숙사 생활을 해야 해서
③ 호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서
④ 요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서
⑤ 프랑스어를 못해서

13. 대화를 듣고, 예술 작품을 이해하는 데 도움이 되는 것으로 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 작품의 주제	② 예술가의 개인 정보
③ 작품의 역사적 배경	④ 작품에 대한 전문가의 견해
⑤ 작품에 사용된 재료

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $500	② $600	③ $700	④ $1,000	⑤ $1,200

15. Amazing  Art  Lovers에 관한  다음  내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 43년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다.
② 지난 10년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다.
③ 일주일 전에, 공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
④ 전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
⑤ 전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.

16. sausage tree에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비가 연중 내리는 곳에서 늘 푸르다.
② 빨간색 꽃이 해질 녘에 핀다.
③ 꽃은 수분이 이루어지면 그다음 날 아침에 떨어진다.
④ 열매는 소시지를 닮았고 먹을 수 있다.
⑤ 지역민들은 악령을 쫓아내기 위해 열매를 사용한다.

17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 제품을 고르시오.
18. 
대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① You have to renew your driver’s license.
② I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
③ Then you should easily pass the test this time.
④ I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
⑤ No wonder you’re curious about your test results.


19. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① And I’ll ask my teacher if that is permitted.
② Then I should garden to relieve my  stress.
③ I can do better if I conquer my indecision.
④ I promise to help you more in the garden.
⑤ So I should work on it a little every day.


20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Paul이 Jennifer에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Paul:   	
① Would you fax me the document right away?
② Will you copy the document for the meeting?
③ If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
④ I have no choice but to visit your office.
⑤ Please check whether you got my fax.



[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reasons for extreme competition among animals for food
② how repeated changes in nature affect animal behavior
③ drawbacks to animals’ adaptation to nature
④ how to preserve endangered wildlife effectively
⑤ types of threats from serious environmental changes


22. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① butterflies	② moths	③ frogs
④ birds	⑤ fish


①
②
③
④
⑤


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

3


23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In our efforts to be the good child, the uncomplaining employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever they want us to do. At times, we lose track of our own boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life, both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to say yes to our true self, we feel empowered, and our relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say   no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your  true voice to say what you really want to say.
① 난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
② 항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다.
④ 자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다.
⑤ 제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다.






24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　In order to successfully release himself from the control of his parents, a child must be secure in his parents’ power, as represented by their loving authority. The more effectively they communicate that authority, the more secure the child feels, and the better able he is to move away from them toward a life of his own. During this lengthy process, whenever he feels threatened, he turns back toward the safety of his parents’ love and authority. In other words, it is impossible for a child to successfully release himself unless he knows exactly where his parents stand, both literally and figuratively. That requires, of course, that his parents know where they themselves stand. If they don’t know where they stand ― if, in other words, they are insecure in their authority ― they cannot communicate security to their child, and he cannot move successfully away from them. Under the circumstances, he will become clingy, or disobedient, or both.
① necessity of parental intervention in ensuring children’s safety
② roles of parental authority in children’s social skills development
③ consequences of offering parental supervision for children’s independence
④ requirements for preventing children from being disobedient to their parents
⑤ importance of communicating parental authority to children for their independence
25. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The names of pitches are associated with particular frequency values. Our current system is called A440 because the note we call ‘A’ that is in the middle of the piano keyboard has been fixed to have a frequency of 440 Hz. This is entirely arbitrary. We could fix ‘A’ at any frequency, such as 439 or 424; different standards were used in the time of Mozart than today. Some people claim that the precise frequencies affect  the overall sound of a musical piece and the sound of instruments. Led Zeppelin, a band popular in the 70s, often tuned their instruments away from the modern A440 standard to give their music an uncommon sound, and perhaps to link it with the European children’s folk songs that inspired many of their compositions. Many purists insist on hearing baroque music on period instruments, both because the instruments have a different sound and because they are designed to play the music in its original tuning standard, something  that  purists deem important.
① Should ‘A’ Always Be Tuned at 440 Hz?
② Arbitrary Tuning: A New Trend in Music
③ How to Correctly Measure Frequency Values
④ How Do Musicians Detect Pitch Differences?
⑤ Unstable Pitches: A Common Thread in Music












26. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　A friend of mine was sitting in the Miami airport reading a magazine while she waited to catch a plane to New York. Her attention was distracted by a rough, noisy quarrel taking place at the ticket counter. “But I must get to New York today!”
① an angry lady hotly told the clerk. “I’m sorry, ma’am, but there are no more seats available,” came the reply. “But my eight-year-old daughter is on that plane. ② I can’t let her fly into New York City all by herself,” she cried. “Sorry, lady. The flight is full,” came the same answer. My friend had been watching and listening to the woman’s woeful story, and her heart was touched with compassion for ③ the distressed mother. She walked over to the ticket agent and offered to take a later flight, if it meant the woman could use ④ her ticket to travel to New York with her daughter. The agent welcomed my friend’s solution and quickly issued a revalidated ticket to ⑤ the woman, and then arranged for another flight for my friend.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　Oxygen is what it is all about. Ironically, the stuff that gives us life eventually kills it. The ultimate life force lies in tiny cellular factories of energy, called mitochondria, ① that burn nearly all the oxygen we breathe in. But breathing has a price. The combustion of oxygen that keeps us alive and active
② sending out by-products called oxygen free radicals. They have Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde characteristics. On  the  one hand, they help guarantee our survival. For example, when the body mobilizes ③ to fight off infectious agents, it generates a burst of free radicals to destroy the invaders very efficiently. On the other hand, free radicals move ④ uncontrollably through the body, attacking cells, rusting their proteins, piercing their membranes and corrupting their genetic code until the cells become dysfunctional and sometimes give up and die. These fierce radicals, ⑤ built into life as both protectors and avengers, are potent agents of aging.
* oxygen free radical:  활성 산소
** membrane:  (해부학)  얇은 막










28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
　When people started to plant stored seed stock deliberately, they also began protecting their plants. This changed the evolutionary ① pressure that these food plants experienced, as they no longer had to survive in a natural environment.  Instead, people created a new environment for them, and selected for other characteristics than nature previously had. Seeds recovered at archaeological sites clearly show that farmers selected for larger seeds and ② thinner seed coats. Thick seed coats are often ③ essential for seeds to survive in  a natural environment because the seeds of many wild plants remain dormant for months until winter is over and rain sets  in. But under human management thick seed coats are unnecessary, as farmers ④ evade responsibility for storing seeds away from moisture and predators. In fact, seeds with thinner coats were ⑤ preferred as they are easier to eat or process into flour, and they allow seedlings to sprout more quickly when sown.
29. 
다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?















　The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007. ① In these groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the Canadian average rate was 46%. ② The average annual hours increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and 34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours. ③ The 15-24 age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second fewest average annual hours. ④ The 35-44 age group had fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while  the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average annual hours. ⑤ Despite their lowest rate of volunteering, seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than  any other age group.

30. Fourier에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier was a French mathematician and physicist. When he was eight years old, his father died, and less than a year after this tragedy, his mother passed away, leaving him an orphan. A charitable lady helped him attend a local military school. He wanted to become an officer but was not allowed to because he was the son of a tailor. In 1795, he became a teacher at the ?cole Normale in Paris. During the post-Revolution frenzy, he spoke out against the use of the guillotine, for which he almost lost his life. When Napoleon invaded Egypt in 1798, Fourier and other scholars accompanied the expedition. Having returned to France, Fourier began his research on heat conduction. His mathematical theory of heat conduction earned him lasting fame. During his stay in Egypt he contracted a strange illness that confined him to well-heated rooms for the rest of his life. On May 16, 1830, Fourier died  in
Paris.
* guillotine: 단두대
① 프랑스의 수학자이자 물리학자였다.
② 재단사의 아들이라는 이유로 장교가 되지 못했다.
③ 단두대 사용에 반대하다가 목숨을 잃을 뻔했다.
④ 열전도에 관한 수학 이론으로 명성을 얻었다.
⑤ 이집트에서 프랑스로 돌아온 후 이상한 병에 걸렸다.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

5


[31～35]  다음  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것을   고르시오.
31. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new product features, they are usually focused on solving just one problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution will 	.
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their suggestions ― the added feature turns out to be worthless because of the problems it causes.
* ramification: 파생된 문제
① impact other product or service functions
② delay the introduction of innovative products
③ induce other customers to make additional requests
④ bring about excessive competition among companies
⑤ discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices




32. The success of human beings depends crucially on numbers and connections. A few hundred people cannot sustain a sophisticated technology. Recall that Australia was colonized 45,000 years ago by pioneers spreading east from Africa along the shore of Asia. The vanguard of such a migration must have been small in number and must have traveled comparatively light. The chances are they had only a sample of the  technology available to their relatives back at the Red Sea crossing. This may explain why Australian aboriginal technology, although it developed and elaborated steadily over the ensuing millennia, was lacking in so many features of the Old World ― elastic weapons, for example, such as bows and catapults, were unknown, as were ovens. It was not that they were ‘primitive’ or that they had mentally regressed; it was  that they  	                                                                                    and did not have a dense enough population and therefore a large enough collective brain to develop them much further. [3점]
* catapult: 투석기
① were too tightly connected to develop new technologies
② focused on developing and elaborating elastic weapons
③ had arrived with only a subset of technologies
④ inherited none of their relatives’ technologies in Africa
⑤ failed to transfer their technical insights to the Old World
33. 
Policymaking is seen to be more objective when experts play a large role in the creation and implementation of the policy, and when utilitarian rationality is the dominant value that guides policy. Through the use of the scientific method to determine the facts of any given policy situation, the power of social constructions is supposedly diminished, and solutions to social problems are discovered in an objective way. This process creates an illusion of neutrality and implies a transcendence of the pitfalls and inequalities commonly associated with policymaking. From this perspective, scientists and professionals emerge as the appropriate experts to be consulted in policymaking, while local citizen input and knowledge is often viewed as unnecessary. Scientific and professional policy design does not necessarily escape the pitfalls of degenerative politics. Scientific and professional expertise often relies on a particular type of knowledge that is limited to utility and rationality considerations. This approach to policy typically does not consider values and cultural factors that cannot be measured empirically. Scientifically designed policies can serve interests that run counter to the public interest. They 	. [3점]
* transcendence: 초월
① use empirically proven theories to reflect locals’ input
② do stress cultural values rather than utilitarian ones
③ may be free from the inequalities of policymaking
④ can reinforce unequal and unjust relationships
⑤ reveal objective solutions to social problems

34. Like many errors and biases that seem irrational on the surface, auditory looming turns out, on closer examination, to be pretty smart. Animals like rhesus monkeys have evolved  the same bias. This intentional error functions as an advance warning system, manned by the self-protection subself, providing individuals with a margin of safety when they are confronted with potentially dangerous approaching objects. If you spot a rhinoceros or hear an avalanche  speeding toward you, auditory looming will motivate  you  to  jump out of the way now rather than wait until the  last second.  The evolutionary benefits of immediately getting out of the way of approaching dangers were so strong that natural selection endowed us ― and other mammals ― with  brains  that 	. Although this kind of bias might inhibit economically rational judgment in laboratory tasks, it leads us to behave in a
deeply rational manner in the real world. Being accurate is not always smart. [3점]
* avalanche: 눈사태
① intentionally see and hear the world inaccurately
② are geared to evaluate aural information precisely
③ deliberately make rational yet ineffective decisions
④ prompt us to overlook dangers without thinking rationally
⑤ accurately detect, but irrationally ignore, approaching dangers



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


35. Mathematics will attract those it can attract, but it will do nothing to overcome resistance to science. Science is universal in principle but in practice it speaks to very few. Mathematics may be considered a communication skill of the highest type, frictionless so to speak; and at the opposite pole from mathematics, the fruits of science show the practical benefits of science without the use of words. But those fruits are ambivalent. Science as science does  not speak;  ideally, all scientific concepts are mathematized when scientists communicate with one another, and when science displays its products to non-scientists it need not, and indeed is not able to, resort to salesmanship. When science speaks to others, it is no longer science, and the scientist becomes or has to hire a publicist who dilutes the exactness of mathematics. In doing  so, the scientist reverses his drive toward mathematical exactness in favor of rhetorical vagueness and metaphor, thus
 	. [3점]

① degrading his ability to use the scientific language needed for good salesmanship
② surmounting the barrier to science by associating science with mathematics
③ inevitably making others who are unskillful in mathematics hostile to science
④ neglecting his duty of bridging the gap between science  and the public
⑤ violating the code of intellectual conduct that defines him as a scientist


[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. F. Scott Fitzgerald thought that the test of first-rate intelligence was the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind
at the same time and still function. The eons shaped our brains in the    (A)    direction. Confirmation bias is a term for the  way the mind systematically avoids confronting contradiction. It does this by overvaluing evidence that confirms what we already think or feel and undervaluing or simply disregarding evidence that refutes it. Testimony from members of the Crow tribe about the destruction of their culture provides an extreme and tragic example of this. A man named Plenty Coups reported that “when the buffalo went away, the hearts of my people fell to the ground and they could not lift them up again. After this nothing happened.” He was not alone in describing the depth of despair as the end of history. “Nothing happened after that,” another Crow warrior said. “We just lived.” The emotion was so strong that the brain (B) evidence of the continued existence of normal, everyday  life  that  might  have
eased it. [3점]
* eon: 무한히 긴 시대, 영겁
(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① opposite …… retained	② opposite …… rejected
③ wrong	…… validated	④ same	…… falsified
⑤ same	…… overlooked
37. 
Oil and gas resources are not likely to be impacted by climate change because they result from a process that takes
millions of years and are geologically trapped.    (A)     , climate change may not only force the shutting down of oil- and gas-producing areas, but increase the possibility of exploration in areas of the Arctic through the reduction in ice cover. Thus, while climate change may not impact these resources, oil and gas reserves and known or potential resources could be affected by new climate conditions, since climate change may affect access to these resources. In  Siberia,       (B)       , the actual exploration challenge is the time required to access, produce, and deliver oil under extreme environmental conditions, where temperatures in  January range from ?20℃ to ?35℃. Warming may ease extreme environmental conditions, expanding the production frontier.

(A) (B)
① On the other hand …… however
② On the other hand …… for instance
③ As a result	…… for instance
④ As a result	…… however
⑤ In other words       …… therefore





38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?

(A) Slowly the trapezoid becomes thinner and thinner, and all that is projected on the retina is a vertical line, which is  the thickness of the door. These changes we can observe and distinguish, but we do not accept them.
(B) Similarly, a round coin is seen as round even when  viewed from an angle at which, objectively, it should appear elliptical. In the same way, we see car wheels as round, even though the retinal image is oval when viewed from an angle other than directly from the front.
(C) At other angles, the image will be seen as a trapezoid.   The edge of the door towards us looks wider  than the edge hinged with the frame.
* trapezoid: 사다리꼴	** elliptical: 타원형의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

7


39. 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?

[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.




　It’s important that the media provide us with diverse and opposing views, so we can choose the best available options. Let’s take the example of going to war. (  ① ) War  should be  a last resort, obviously, undertaken when all other options  have failed. ( ② ) They should be providing the most intense scrutiny on our behalf, so the public can see the other side of things. ( ③ ) Otherwise, we may be drawn into unnecessary wars, or wars fought for reasons  other  than  those presented by governments and generals. ( ④ ) Most of the time, the media fail to perform this crucial role. ( ⑤ ) Even the large, so-called ‘liberal’ American media have admitted that they have not always been watchdogs for the public interest, and that their own coverage on some major issues  “looks  strikingly one-sided at times.”
* scrutiny: 면밀한 조사

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Plug In and Log On: Farewell to Loneliness
② Ethical Issues in the Online Community
③ Humans and Robots: Friends or Foes?
④ Connected yet Detached in Virtuality
⑤ Explore the Net, Go Beyond Reality



















(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① justify  …… time	② justify   …… face
③ cherish …… time	④ modify …… face
⑤ modify …… trouble
42. 
위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① adventurous endeavors
② technological outbursts
③ face-to-face encounters
④ dialogs with social robots
⑤ supernatural interventions



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　How much space do you need to be happy? Part of the American story is that bigger is better, and with cheap credit and tax breaks for home buyers, it’s tempting to stretch one’s finances to build or buy a larger house. My grandpa Otto chose a different path. (a) He didn’t want to find himself working longer and longer hours just to pay for more space and the stuff to fill it. He grew up in a farming community and within a very large family, so living simply was integral to his life philosophy.

(B)
43. 
주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)






44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)






45. 위 글의 grandpa에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 농촌 사회의 대가족 속에서 성장했다.
② 여러 가지 면에서 필자의 삶의 모델이 되었다.
③ 1950년대에 600제곱 피트의 집을 지었다.
④ 집을 짓는 데 필요한 대부분의 자재를 부두에서 구했다.
⑤ 지역 사회의 급격한 변화를 알아차리지 못했다.


(C)

(D)


이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


제 3 교시

2015학년도 4월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역
1




6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I already had lunch.
② We have to eat right now.
③ It’ll take about 30 minutes.
④ You didn’t hand in the report.
⑤ Let’s make Chinese food instead.



2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I will keep on reading it then.
② You should book a ticket first.
③ I didn’t even start reading the book.
④ Let me borrow it after you finish it.
⑤ You can read the book at the library.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 불꽃놀이 행사를 홍보하려고
② 캠핑장 이용 규칙을 안내하려고
③ 물 절약의 중요성을 강조하려고
④ 분리수거 방법 변경을 공지하려고
⑤ 캠핑 장비 선택 요령을 알려주려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수분 섭취의 중요성
② 인공 탈취제의 위험성
③ 효과적인 해충 퇴치법
④ 녹차 잎의 다양한 용도
⑤ 카펫의 위생적 관리 요령



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 경찰관 - 신고자	② 역무원 - 여행객
③ 차량 정비사 - 고객	④ 사진작가 - 모델
⑤ 공원 관리인 - 주민


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to find his passport
② to watch his luggage
③ to charge his cell phone
④ to get him some medicine
⑤ to drive him to the airport

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 댄스 경연대회에 참가할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 어깨를 다쳐서	② 병원에 입원해서
③ 사촌 결혼식에 가야 해서	④ 파트너를 구하지 못해서
⑤ 참가 자격을 갖추지 못해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $105	② $107	③ $125	④ $127	⑤ $132

10. 대화를 듣고, 전시회에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 장소	② 전시품	③ 기간
④ 관람 시간	⑤ 입장료

11. 학교 세미나실에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 최근에 수리가 끝났다.
② 사전에 예약해야 한다.
③ 4명 이상의 단체만 이용할 수 있다.
④ 한 번에 최대 3시간까지 사용 가능하다.
⑤ 매주 일요일에 문을 닫는다.





2	영어 영역
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 선택할 텐트를 고르시오.
Tent Heaven’s Bestseller


①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:  	
① Why don’t you join my running club?
② It’s too dangerous to exercise at night.
③ You have lost a lot of weight swimming.
④ Can you recommend a place to work out?
⑤ Exercising alone is the best way to get fit.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① You’d better go see a doctor.
② I’ll get some plants and try it.
③ Let’s plant small trees outside.
④ It’s good to drink water regularly.
⑤ We should water the plant every day.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Cindy가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Cindy: Brian,  	
① why don’t we sit apart from each other?
② we can come back to the library tonight.
③ shall we prepare for the exam together?
④ you have to hang up the phone right now.
⑤ you should stop making distracting sounds.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① health-related problems of noise
② benefits of keeping your place organized
③ ways to concentrate well on your studies
④ factors influencing your psychological well-being
⑤ positive effects of music on emotional development

17. 언급된 소리가 아닌 것은?
① 바람 소리	② 파도 소리	③ 빗소리
④ 폭포 소리	⑤ 새 소리



① 상품 수선을 의뢰하려고
② 차액 환불을 요청하려고
③ 할인 품목을 문의하려고
④ 품질 차이를 항의하려고
⑤ 결제 수단을 변경하려고


19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
 Some of the words we use most frequently are not expressive. If someone asked you what you thought of a movie or your dinner, you might respond: “It was fine.” Do you mean, ‘fine’ as in ‘fine wine,’ or ‘fine art?’ Or do you mean, ‘fine’ as in ‘excellent, good, fine or poor?’ ‘Fine’ can be used to express satisfaction or disappointment. There are hundreds of words that, like ‘fine,’ express very little meaning. They are fillers. Choose words that are more expressive, like ‘great’ or ‘terrific’ or ‘wonderful’ if you want to express pleasure, and words like ‘adequate’ or ‘satisfactory’ if your intent is to communicate that the movie or meal was okay, but nothing more. These words won’t be misunderstood.
① 어휘력 향상을 통해 경쟁력을 갖춰라.
② 말보다는 행동으로 상대에게 만족감을 주라.
③ 상대방의 감정을 배려하여 어휘를 선택하라.
④ 진심을 담은 칭찬으로 상대의 마음을 움직여라.
⑤ 의미를 분명히 전달할 수 있는 어휘를 사용하라.








20. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?

영어 영역	3
22. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?

 Unlike books and paintings, music speaks to us through a re-creator, a musician who makes the printed music sound. A composition, even a familiar one, can be a new experience each time it’s performed. It is the job of the performer to bring life to the printed symbols laid out by a composer. Just how loud is a chord marked ??? How fast is a section labeled allegro? No matter how many specific indications of rhythm, dynamics, or accent appear on a page, much is left to the performer. Like that of an actor, his or her interpretation is full of subtle timings and inflections. Performers project to an audience a mixture of their own feelings and the composer’s intentions. Critics sometimes say about a particularly convincing interpretation that a performer is ‘identified’ with a work and its composer. That’s how close the relationship can be.
① the benefits of early music education
② the difficulties of making a composition
③ the importance of a composer’s intention
④ the role of a music performer as an interpreter
⑤ the effects of musical signs on music interpretation











21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
 People love to tell others what to do; they believe giving advice is ‘helpful,’ even if the advice is not requested. Such telling worked in the Industrial Era because it was hierarchical in structure. This communication style implied the teller inherently had valuable information to provide and knew the correct solution. In the Information Age, people have more equal access to knowledge and, with the help of technology, are generally able to find their own solutions. If someone wants advice, they will ask for it. In general, telling is no longer well received. It can be perceived as lacking in respect, narrowing opportunities and shutting down possibilities by implying that the individual is incapable of solving a problem.
① 정보화 시대에는 매체 활용 능력이 필수적이다.
② 남에게 충고하기 전에 자신을 먼저 돌아보아야 한다.
③ 정확한 정보만이 상대방에 대한 정확한 이해를 돕는다.
④ 일방적으로 조언하는 것은 정보화 시대에 더 이상 적절하지 않다.
⑤ 기술의 발전은 상상 속에서나 가능한 일을 현실로 바꾸어 놓는다.
 
Whether or not we can catch up on sleep ― on the weekend, say ― is a hotly debated topic among sleep researchers; the latest evidence suggests that while it isn’t ideal, it might help. When Peter Liu, a UCLA sleep researcher, brought chronically sleep-restricted people into the lab for a weekend of sleep during which they slept about 10 hours per night, they showed improvements in the ability of insulin to process blood sugar. That suggests that catch-up sleep may undo some but not all of the damage that sleep deprivation causes, which is encouraging given how many adults don’t get the hours they need each night. Still, Liu isn’t ready to endorse the habit of sleeping less and making up for it later. “It’s like telling people you only need to eat healthy during the weekends, but during the week you can eat whatever you like,” he says.
* endorse: (공개적으로) 지지하다
① Signs of Sleep Deprivation
② How to Break Bad Sleeping Habits
③ Catch-Up Sleep: Is It a Perfect Solution?
④ Unhappy Weekends of Sleep-Deprived People
⑤ Sleep Loss: A Common Problem for Modern People











23. 다음 글에서 ‘I’가 마지막에 느꼈을 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
 One morning, my 5-year-old daughter shook me awake excitedly. “A fairy has left you an amazing present,” she whispered. “Look!” I reached under my pillow and found a one dollar note, torn exactly in half. She said, “The fairy left half a dollar for you, and the other half is under daddy’s pillow.” I was struck speechless at her unexpected gift. Simultaneously, I found myself in a dilemma. Messages about how important it was for my daughter to learn the value of currency came flooding into my mind. Should I use this opportunity to teach her about not wasting money, explaining that a dollar torn in half is worthless? Should I try not to discourage her kind behavior? My thoughts all came in a rush: Which quality should I reinforce? Which behavior should I promote?
① upset	② amused
③ ashamed	④ confused
⑤ interested





4	영어 영역

24. James Gibbs에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
 James Gibbs is best known for his successful blending of Renaissance and Baroque architectural elements into an early-18th century Neo-Classicism. He was born in Scotland and studied in Rome under the Late Baroque Italian architect Carlo Fontana. Returning to England in 1709, he was appointed a member of the commission authorized to build 50 churches in London. Between 1722 and 1726 Gibbs constructed his most famous church, Saint Martin-in-the-Fields, which has a spire rather than a dome rising from the roof of the building. Of Gibbs’ later works the circular ‘Radcliffe Camera’ library at Oxford University is his most ambitious and monumental achievement. His architectural style has influenced the architecture of churches in England and the United States.
① 스코틀랜드 태생으로 로마에서 공부했다.
② 교회 건축을 위한 위원으로 임명되었다.
③ 지붕으로부터 솟은 돔이 있는 교회를 건축했다.
④ Radcliffe Camera 도서관은 그의 기념비적 성과물이다.
⑤ 영국과 미국의 교회 건축 양식에 영향을 주었다.

26. 뮤지컬 Oliver에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?


① 영화를 토대로 만든 뮤지컬이다.
② 4월 10일에는 공연을 두 차례 한다.
③ 학생과 노인의 입장권 가격은 다르다.
④ 입장권은 4월 9일에 판매를 시작한다.
⑤ 모든 수익금은 자선단체에 기부된다.


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

 The pie charts above show the global car color popularity based on the data of cars manufactured in 2013 and 2014.
① The most popular car color in the world was White in both 2013 and 2014. ② Black and Silver tied for second place in popularity in 2013, but Black stood alone as the second most favorite color in 2014. ③ Gray fell slightly in popularity from 13 percent in 2013 to 12 percent in 2014. ④ In 2013 and 2014, Red and Blue remained the same in popularity at 9 percent and 7 percent, respectively. ⑤ Natural was less popular than Red in 2013, but this was reversed in 2014.
* natural: 옅은 황갈색


27. City Shuttle Bus에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 무료로 이용할 수 있다.
② 노란색 셔틀 로고가 있는 정류장에서 탑승할 수 있다.
③ 휠체어를 탄 사람들도 이용 가능하다.
④ 배차 간격은 10분이다.
⑤ 주말에는 오전 10시부터 운행된다.





영어 영역	5

28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
 Leonardo	da	Vinci	was	one	of	the	most	learned	and well-rounded persons ever to live. The entire universe from the
30. 
밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은? [3점]
 We’re all told at school that white reflects sunlight and black absorbs it, so the ① paler your clothes are, the cooler you’ll be. But it’s not quite that simple. In many hot countries, locals

wing of a dragonfly to the birth of the earth (A)

the

often wear ② dark colors. Peasants in China and old ladies in

playground of his curious intelligence. But did Leonardo have
some mystical or innate gift of insight and invention, or was his brilliance learned and earned? Certainly he had an unusual mind

southern Europe, for instance, traditionally wear black, and
the Tuareg, the nomadic people of the Sahara, favor indigo blue. These clothes are ③ effective because there are two

and an uncanny ability to see (B)

others didn’t see.

thermal	processes	happening	at	once.	Heat	is	coming

But the six thousand pages of detailed notes and drawings
present clear evidence of a diligent, curious student ― a perpetual learner in laborious pursuit of wisdom who was constantly exploring, questioning, and testing. Expanding your mind is vital to being creative. Therefore, (C)
regularly in learning opportunities is one of the greatest gifts you can give yourself.
(A) (B)	(C)
① was …… what …… investing
② was  …… that …… invest
③ was …… what …… invest
④ were …… what …… invest
⑤ were …… that …… investing












29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
 One day a wise old monk heard an impatient pounding on the door. ① He opened it and greeted a young man, who said, “I have studied with great and wise masters. However, just in case there is anything more I need to know, I have come to see if ② you can add to my knowledge.” “Very well,” said the monk. “Come and have tea, and we will discuss your studies.” When the tea was ready, the old man began to pour it into the visitor’s cup. When the cup was full, ③ he continued pouring until the tea spilled over the side of the cup. The startled man jumped back and shouted, “④ You’re a fool who does not even know when a cup is full!” The wise man calmly replied, “Just like this cup, your mind is so full of ideas that there is no room for any more. Come to me with an empty-cup mind, and then
⑤ you will learn something.”

downwards from the sun but it is also going outwards from
the body. Though light clothes are better at ④ reflecting the sun’s heat, dark clothes are better at radiating the body’s heat. Given that no one born in a hot climate willingly stands in direct sunlight, the dark clothing has the ⑤ defect because it keeps you cooler when you’re in the shade.
* thermal: 열의, 온도의











[31 ~ 33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. What does curiosity mean, and why is it so important? We think of curiosity as exploration: being inquisitive, seeking to learn and understand. Some associate curiosity with being nosy. After all, aren’t we being nosy if we are curious about another person, asking personal questions? We believe there is a difference between the two. Nosy people ask questions and proceed to weigh the answers provided. Their intention is not to learn about the other person, but to compare, perhaps wanting to determine who is better or worse. In contrast, true curiosity 	. It is about exploring and learning with the goal of greater understanding, which is free from setting values. When curious people ask a question, their only intention is to better understand, whether it is another person, an idea, a place, an origin, or anything that creates an interest in further exploration. [3점]
① grows with age
② overcomes fear
③ holds no judgment
④ comes from confidence
⑤ creates brighter personality





6	영어 영역

32. We tend not to notice how many creative tasks benefit from
constraints because they are built in and have become invisible. For example, almost all popular music is in 4/4 time, four beats in the bar, with the emphasis usually landing on the first beat. Tracks are normally three or four minutes in length, contain a chorus, and so on. These are just a few constraints of many that popular music follows, and yet look at the variation that can be achieved. Many songs break these rules, but they often achieve their effects because there is a rule to break in the first place. Painters, writers, artists, and so on are all influenced by previous styles to various degrees and it’s these previous styles that provide constraints. The very limitations we impose on ourselves can be 	. [3점]
① the inherent cultural beliefs
② the resistance to taking risks
③ the seeds of our finest creations
④ the obstacles to our future success
⑤ the stepping stone for music education













33. While we like to think that our habits follow our intentions, it’s possible for intention and habit to be completely reversed. How the habit started in the first place could be a complete accident, but we can then work out our intentions from our behavior, as long as there’s no strong reason for that behavior. Say I take a walk around the park every afternoon and each time I follow a particular route which takes me past a duck pond. When asked why I take this route, I might reply that I like to watch people feeding the ducks. In reality, I just walked that way the first time, completely at random, and saw no reason not to do the same the next day. Now, after the habit is established, I try to come up with a reason and the ducks spring to mind. I end up 	.
[3점]
① hiding the intention of my previous behavior
② regretting my unconscious behavior in the past
③ being confused about the reason why I started exercising
④ inferring intention from what was essentially just chance
⑤ getting out of my old habits and forming new ones instead
34. 
빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
 From a broad range of early cultures, extending back to about a million years, natural objects began to be used as tools and implements to supplement or enhance the capacities of the hand. 	(A)		, the hand is capable of clawing soil to dig out an edible root, but a digging stick or clam shell is also capable of being grasped to do the job more easily, in a sustainable manner, reducing damage to fingers and nails. The task is made easier still if a shell is tied with fiber at a right angle to the end of a stick, to make a simple hoe. It can then be used more effectively in wider circles from an erect working position. 		(B)		, the hand can be cupped in order to drink water, but a deep shell forms the same shape permanently and more effectively to function without leakage as a dipper.
* hoe: (자루가 긴) 괭이
(A) (B)
① For example …… Similarly
② For example …… As a result
③ In other words …… However
④ In contrast …… Instead
⑤ In contrast …… In addition

[35 ~ 36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
35. Enough sunlight falls on Earth to meet our energy needs ten thousand times over. However, it’s highly dispersed. ① Various technologies already exist to concentrate the sunlight using curved mirrors and focus it on tanks of liquid ― usually water or oil. ② If you’re lucky enough to live in a sunny part of the country, solar heating panels like these are an excellent way to heat water for individual homes. ③ They sit on the roof rather like a satellite dish and provide baths and showers that are satisfyingly hot and guilt-free. ④ However, Earth is not the only planet that receives solar radiation. ⑤ Solar heating can also be used on a much larger scale, by making the hot liquid drive an engine to generate electricity.

36. Food is neither good nor bad in the absolute, though we have been taught to recognize it as such. The organ of taste is not the tongue, but the brain, a culturally (and therefore historically) determined organ through which the criteria for evaluations are transmitted and learned. ① Therefore, these criteria vary in space and in time. ② What in one era is judged positively, in another can change meaning; what in one locale is considered tasty, in another can be rejected as disgusting.
③ Very often times, the failure to detect spoiled or toxic food
can lead to serious health problems. ④ Definitions of taste belong to the cultural heritage of human society. ⑤ As there are differing tastes and preferences among different peoples and regions of the world, so do tastes and preferences evolve over the course of centuries. [3점]





영어 영역	7

[37 ~ 38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
37. 
39. 
글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?



(A) People in the Middle Ages tried to measure the minutes and hours of the day with a mechanical clock that used gears, wheels, and weights, but these clocks were unreliable. Galileo discovered that a pendulum always takes the same amount of time to swing whether the swing is narrow or wide.
(B) The measurement of time was probably the most important of all, but in Galileo’s time, scientists had not yet invented a dependable timepiece. Ancient humans could measure years, months, and days with the movements of Earth, the Moon, and the Sun.
(C) Sixteen years after Galileo’s death, the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens attached a pendulum to the gears of a mechanical clock, and the grandfather clock was born. Humans finally knew what time it was, and science had a new important tool.
* pendulum: (시계의) 추
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)

38.



 There is evidence that when we form impressions of others, we pay more attention to our first impressions. This tendency is called the ‘primacy effect.’ The primacy effect was documented in a famous study conducted by social psychologist Solomon Asch. ( ① ) Individuals were asked to evaluate two people based on two lists of adjectives. ( ② ) The list for the first person had the following adjectives: intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, and envious. ( ③ ) The list for the other person had the same adjectives, but in reverse order. ( ④ ) Although the content was identical, respondents gave the first person a more positive evaluation than the second. ( ⑤ ) In a similar manner, the first impressions we form about someone often affect our impression of subsequent perceptions of that person.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





(A) It is no coincidence that they are commonly referred to in the negative terms ‘junk mail’ and ‘spam,’ because they are unwelcome. All too often the final result is a frustrated customer with no intention of buying and a marketer who has wasted his budget ― ‘lose-lose.’
(B) As such, the customer is more receptive to the organization because the messages are anticipated, personal, and relevant. The opposite of permission marketing is interruption marketing, which Godin claims, can lead to a ‘lose-lose’ situation.
(C) Interruption marketing occurs when the customer receives unrequested direct marketing messages, such as direct mail, telephone calls, e-mails, and text messages. Godin argues that these things often end up wasting the customer’s time and therefore lead to frustration. [3점]
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)










(A) (B)
① unreliable	‥‥‥ identical
② unreliable	‥‥‥ dissimilar
③ improved	‥‥‥ distinctive
④ qualified	‥‥‥ parallel
⑤ qualified	‥‥‥ opposed






8	영어 영역
[41 ~ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.



(B) 




(C) 

(D) 








41. 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Fortune Is in Your Hands
② Why Are Seaweeds Popular in Exhibits?
③ Alternative Sources of Food in the Future
④ An Accidental Spreading of an Exotic Species
⑤ Seaweeds: Protectors of Marine Environment

42. 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① biological invaders
② trade barriers
③ germ carriers
④ safety guards
⑤ protective filters

[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)



43. 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. Steven Courage에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 눈보라가 칠 때 마차에서 떨어졌다.
② 중상을 입은 군인들에게 연설했다.
③ 시장에게 재정적 지원을 요청했다.
④ 큰 은행의 은행장이 되었다.
⑤ 일어선 채로 부상 부위를 보여주었다.




2016학년도  대학수학능력시험  6월 모의평가 문제지	1


6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes, I’ll buy that raincoat.
② No.  I’ll  bring  her  an umbrella.
③ Wow.  The  weather  is  so clear.
④ Good. We should come home early.
⑤ I agree. Let’s go and eat out tonight.





2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Good. I’ll take the class.
② Sure. I’ll bring my textbook.
③ Okay. You can leave a message.
④ You’re right. The meeting was successful.
⑤ That’s true. But I thought it was tomorrow.



3. 다음을  듣고, 남자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 동물 꼬리의 다양한 기능
② 희귀 동물 보호의 필요성
③ 동물들의 다양한 의사소통 방법
④ 곤충류 날개와 조류 날개의 차이점
⑤ 날개의 기능과 꼬리 기능의 유사성



4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 독서는 학업 성적을 향상시킨다.
② 글쓰기는 정서 발달을 촉진한다.
③ 토론 수업은 말하기 능력을 신장시킨다.
④ 올바른 독서 습관은 유년기에 형성된다.
⑤ 문학 작품 읽기는 상상력 향상에 도움이 된다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가수 － 매니저	② 작가 － 출판사 직원
③ 영화감독 － 기자	④ 관광객 － 관광 가이드
⑤ 출연자 － 연출가
7. 
대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to contact a band
② to reserve a restaurant
③ to pick up a wedding dress
④ to send out invitations
⑤ to make a cake

8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 변경된 날에 역사 유적지 탐방을 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 가족 여행을 가야 해서
② 지리 숙제를 해야 해서
③ 뮤지컬 예행연습이 있어서
④ 할머니 생신 잔치에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 수해 복구 봉사 활동에 참여해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $63	② $72	③ $90	④ $99	⑤ $110

10. 대화를 듣고, Blood  Donor  Day에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 날짜	② 슬로건	③ 장소
④ 참여 자격	⑤ 증정품

11. Art  Museum  Fair에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1995년에 시작되었다.
② 지역 예술가를 후원하는 행사이다.
③ 매년 가을에 개최된다.
④ 입장료는 20달러이다.
⑤ 민속춤 공연을 포함한다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 구입할 냉장고를 고르시오.

18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Refrigerators on Sale


①
②
③
④
⑤


13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Yes. It’s very time-consuming, but it’s worth it.






① 학비 지원 승인에 감사하려고



* Human Resources: 인사 부서

② I’m sorry that I didn’t clean up my room yet.
③ That’s why I parked my car in the garage.
④ Yeah. A garage sale can save your time.
⑤ I didn’t get my newspaper today, either.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① You sing the songs beautifully.
② I’ll give you my phone number.
③ Just thinking of it makes me happy.
④ I’m sorry to hear that you’re leaving.
⑤ Let’s go and get our tickets refunded.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Matilda가 Tony에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Matilda: Tony,   	
① swimming is a popular sport.
② your temperature isn’t that high.
③ teamwork will win the competition.
④ you should get ready for practice now.
⑤ the most important thing is your health.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 홍보 자료 제작 협조를 요청하려고
② 전공 체험 프로그램을 안내하려고
③ 대학 내 편의 시설을 소개하려고
④ 수강 신청 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 입학 지원 자격을 알려주려고

17. 언급된 학과가 아닌 것은?
① Economics	② Biology	③ Sociology
④ Chemistry	⑤ Architecture



② 대학 입학 추천서를 부탁하려고
③ 장학금 신청 자격을 문의하려고
④ 급여 인상 계획 승인을 요청하려고
⑤ 업무 효율성 향상 방안을 제안하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 Gabby의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? Stepping up to the microphone, Gabby could feel the sweat starting to run down her face and neck. She tried to take a deep
breath, but couldn’t. As her name was called, Gabby became more afraid of speaking before a large audience. Then, she suddenly remembered the words of a woman who had gradually overcome the same fear: “Fear, rapid heartbeat, quick  breathing, and sweating are simply  the body’s  declaration  that we are ready  to fight.” Recalling this, Gabby calmed down and remembered clearly what she had to say. Assured, Gabby smiled and started     to deliver her speech. The words flowed out like water, and   her beating heart gave her more and more mental strength.   The performance was successful. She had overcome her fear.
① hopeful  → scared	② indifferent   → refreshed
③ jealous   → delighted	④ anxious        → confused
⑤ worried → confident

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Planning involves only the half of your brain that controls your logical thinking. The other intuitive half of your brain      is left out of this planning process. If you insist on always having a plan, you cut yourself off from your intuitive self    and the inner joy it provides. To break planning addiction, allow yourself one freedom.  Decide  to spend a day exploring a park or a neighborhood with curiosity as your only guide.  The next time you feel attracted to someone, and want to introduce yourself, go ahead. You’ll be likely to make a new friend. By giving yourself freedom to follow your intuition,  you develop your sensitivity to your inner voice. You learn to hear the quiet messages that can make your life an adventure.
① 내면의 즐거움을 얻기 위해 친구를 많이 사귀어라.
② 학습 계획을 수립할 때는 시간 배분을 적절히 해라.
③ 사고력 향상을 위해 가능한 한 산책 시간을 늘려라.
④ 새로운 모험을 시작하기 전에 주변 사람들과 상의해라.
⑤ 계획 수립에 얽매이지만 말고 때로는 직관에 따라 행동해라.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


[21～22] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
21. Although  the  Internet  seems  truly  global  these  days, less  than  half  of   the   world’s  population  has  access  to   it. Some four billion people are still  unconnected.  This  spring, IT engineers  will  begin  to  shift  to  the  next  phase  in a grand plan  to  bring  the  Internet  to  everyone.  Their  goal  is  to  establish  a  network  of  high-altitude  balloons  that  will  rain  4G  LTE  signals  down  to  anyone  with  a    4G device. Regional telecom companies will transmit the signals to the  balloons,  and  then  each  balloon  will  relay  the signals to a  ground  area  many  miles  in  diameter.  In  this way, farmers in remote areas will be able to access  weather data, and rural children will be able to pursue
online educations. By the  end  of  the  year,  the  engineers  aim to have 100 balloons about 13 miles up.
* altitude: 높이, 고도
① Balloons for Weather Forecasting
② Balloons to Connect the World
③ A One-Day Tour in a Balloon
④ Online Education for Farmers
⑤ 4G: The Fastest Connection










22. Inflation can  be  a  major  life  concern  for  most  people.  It makes it difficult for households to plan ahead. This is because ‘future problems’ concerning  inflation  often  make  us change  our  plans  for  the  future.  For  instance,  how much should the  parents  of  a  newborn  start  regularly  saving to pay  for  her  college  education?  If  inflation averages two percent, prices roughly double every thirty-six years. But if inflation gets  up  to  eight  percent,  prices roughly  double  every  nine  years.  A   Harvard   education that currently costs $100,000 may therefore end up  costing half  a  million  dollars  for  an  infant  born  today.  Millions  of workers who retired with pensions during the 1960s
and 1970s found that inflation pushed up costs  far  beyond their expected expenses. Many had to  reenter  the  workforce  just to make ends meet.
① What Causes Inflation?
② Inflation Affects Future Plans
③ Various  Ways  to  Reduce  the  Inflation Rate
④ Actual  Benefits  Exceed  Estimated  Expenses
⑤ How Quickly Can the Inflation Rate Climb?
23. 
다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Tourism is important for more than just  vacationing. Tourism allows  people  from  different  places  and  cultures  to come together, and then tourists and host  communities  learn about each other’s differences and similarities.  They  also learn new  tastes  and  ways  of  thinking,  which  may  lead to a better understanding between hosts and tourists. Another positive  effect  of  tourism  is  the  aid  it  provides  for the survival of a  society’s  culture,  especially  the  culture’s art forms. The  opportunity  to  sell  native  artworks to tourists or perform folk dances for them  may  encourage local artists to preserve traditional art forms. For example, Fijians have developed their palm mat and  shell  jewelry  crafts into profitable tourist businesses. They also earn additional income by performing folk dances and  fire  walking.
① misunderstandings between hosts and tourists
② various ways of creating tourism products
③ negative effects of cultural exchanges
④ disappearance of traditional cultures
⑤ cultural benefits of tourism




24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Distribution of Time Spent per Shopping App Category












　The above graph shows the distribution of time spent by consumers using  shopping  apps  across  various  shopping  app categories in December 2011 and December 2012. ① Of the six categories, Retailer apps saw the greatest increase in  the share of time spent, from 15%  in  December  2011  to  27% in December 2012. ② On the other hand, the share of time spent with Online Marketplace apps  decreased  from  25% in December 2011 to 20% in December 2012. ③ The Purchase Assistant app share decreased by one percentage point from December 2011 to December 2012. ④ The share  of Price Comparison apps in December 2011 was the same     as that in December 2012. ⑤ Daily Deal apps showed the smallest share of time spent in both December 2011 and December 2012.



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 교황 Julius Ⅱ의 무덤에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The project of creating the tomb of Pope Julius Ⅱ was originally given  to  Michelangelo  in  1505,  but  the  tomb  was not completed until 1545. It was designed by Michelangelo himself as the pope requested. The  design  called for some  40  statues,  and  the  tomb  was  to  be  a  giant structure. Just less than  a  year  after  the  initial  work  on the tomb began, it stopped because of  lack  of  funds.  When Pope Julius Ⅱ died in 1513, he left money for the completion of his tomb,  so  Michelangelo  started  work  again. After some years of  carving,  he  completed  Moses,  one  of  the  most  famous  statues  of  the  tomb.  However,  the next pope, Leo X, had little interest in continuing the project. As time went on, its scale was reduced, and  the  project for the tomb was revised again and again.
① Michelangelo가 디자인했다.
② 자금 부족으로 작업이 중단된 적이 있다.
③ Moses는 무덤의 가장 유명한 조각상 중 하나이다.
④ 교황 Leo  X는 프로젝트를 지속하는 것에 관심이 많았다.
⑤ 프로젝트는 여러 차례 수정되었다.


26. 2015 National Essay Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
27. 
Eugene Farm Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

Eugene Farm Tour
Are you looking for somewhere special to go for the weekend? Come and visit Eugene Farm, and enjoy our beautiful fields, barns, and cheese shop.
Tour Schedule
?The   tour   will   run   from   10:00   a.m.   to   4:00   p.m., Sunday, June 14, 2015.
- Morning: See a wide variety of crops and animals.
- Lunch (12:30 p.m. ― 1:30 p.m.): Everything we serve is grown on our farm!
- Afternoon: Visit our cheese shop, and you can  learn  how to make cheese!
Admission Fee (lunch included)
?$30  for  11  &  older
?$20  for  children  aged  3  to  10
?Free  for  2  &  under

Reservation
?Reservations  are  required,  and  must  be  made  on our website (www.eugenefarm.com) by 6:00 p.m., Thursday, June 11, 2015.



2015 National Essay Contest
The Evergreen Foundation is excited to call for submissions for the 2015 National Essay Contest! This contest is designed to encourage high school students to become more aware of the importance of our environment.
Contest Theme
?How  can  we  preserve  our  forests?
Requirements & Submission Guidelines
?High  school  students  only
?Only  one  essay  per  student
?Essays  must  be  between  1,500  and  2,000  words.
?Due  by  July  15,  2015
We will announce the  winners  of  this  year’s  contest  on August 15, 2015.
Only essays submitted by email will be accepted. (email: 2015essay@evergreeners.org)
For more information, visit www.evergreeners.org.

① 주제가 정해져 있지 않다.
② 대학생을 대상으로 한다.
③ 1인당 1편의 에세이만 제출할 수 있다.
④ 수상자는 2015년 7월 15일에 발표된다.
⑤ 에세이는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.


① 오전 10시부터 오후 4시까지 진행된다.
② 오후에 치즈 만드는 법을 배울 수 있다.
③ 입장료에는 점심 값이 포함되어 있다.
④ 2세 이하는 무료로 입장할 수 있다.
⑤ 예약을 하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.

28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　An independent artist is probably the one ① who lives closest to an unbounded  creative  situation.  Many  artists  have considerable  freedom  from  external  requirements  about what to do, how  to  do  it,  when  to  do  it,  and  why.  At the same time, however, we know  that  artists  usually  limit themselves quite ② forcefully by choice  of  material  and form of expression. To make the choice to express a feeling by  carving  a  specific  form  from  a  rock,  without  the use of high  technology  or  colors,  ③ restricting  the  artist significantly. Such choices are not made to limit creativity, but rather to cultivate ④ it. When everything is possible, creativity has no tension. Creativity is  strange  in  that it finds its  way  in  any  kind  of  situation,  no  matter  how restricted, just as the  same  amount  of  water  flows  faster and stronger through a  narrow  strait  ⑤ than  across  the open sea.
* strait: 해협




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　The  desert  locust  lives  in  two  remarkably  different  styles  depending  on  the  availability  of  food  sources  and the density of the local locust population. When food  is  scarce, as  it  usually  is  in  their  native  desert  habitat,  locusts  are  born  with  coloring  designed  for  camouflage  and lead (A)  solitary / social  lives.  But  when  rare  periods  of significant rain produce major vegetation  growth, everything changes. At first, the locusts  continue  to  be  loners,  just  feasting   off   the  (B)  insufficient / abundant food  supply.  But  as  the  extra   vegetation   starts   to   die off, the  locusts  find  themselves  crowded  together.  Suddenly, baby locusts are born with bright colors and a preference for company. Instead  of  avoiding  one  another  and hiding from predators  through  camouflage  and  inactivity,  these  locusts  gather  in  vast  groups,  feed together, and (C) overwhelm / overestimate their predators simply through numbers.
* camouflage: 위장

(A) (B)	(C)
① solitary   …… insufficient   …… overwhelm
② solitary  …… abundant	…… overwhelm
③ solitary …… insufficient …… overestimate
④ social	…… abundant	…… overwhelm
⑤ social	…… insufficient …… overestimate






30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Ellie walked to school in her new shoes. “I like those,” Megan whispered.  “Cool.”  Ellie  felt  happy.  ① She  knew  it was hard to get compliments from  Megan  and  couldn’t  hide her smile. The two friends  had  desks  side  by  side  at the  back.  “Stop  talking,  you  two,”  said  Miss   Smith. “Bring your books  to  me  if  you’ve  finished.”  Ellie  followed Megan to the  front  of  the  class.  ② She  always  let  Megan  go  first.  She  felt  scared   when   Miss   Smith was upset. Miss Smith noticed ③ her new shoes. “Those aren’t suitable for school,” she said, her  voice  cold.  Ellie  took a deep breath. “The  shop  didn’t  have  black  shoes,  Miss Smith,” ④ she said.  Her  voice  came  out  in  a  whisper. “The school uniform requires black or dark blue shoes,” said Miss Smith. “Report to me in proper shoes,  please. On Monday.”  ⑤ She  used  her  quiet-shout  voice  and Ellie shivered.
* shiver: 떨다

[31～33]  다음  빈칸에   들어갈   말로  가장  적절한   것을 고르시오.
31. In an increasingly globalized  world,  literature  in translation has an especially important role. Increasingly, writers, readers,  and  publishers  are  turning  to  literature  as  a bridge between cultures, particularly Western and Arab societies.  This  growing  interest  is,  in  turn,  driving  a   boom in translation.  However,  not  surprisingly  perhaps, most translations  are  from  English  into  other  languages,  not from another language, such as Arabic, into English. Hence,  the  huge  American  market  is  seen  as  driving  the
 	. Bookstores in the United States, for example, rarely stock more than  Nobel  Prize  winner  Naguib Mahfouz’s Cairo Trilogy, a masterful,  realistic  account  of  life in Cairo and of a merchant family in the  mid-20th  century. Western readers likely know little  of  Mahfouz’s  more experimental work, his political  and  religious  allegories,  or  his  historical  dramas.  The  result  is  a  kind   of one-way mirror between America and the rest  of  the  world. [3점]
* allegory: 우화, 풍자

① equality	② diversity	③ interaction
④ imbalance	⑤ uncertainty







32. We  tend  to  assume  that  the  way  to  get  more  time  is  to speed up. But speeding up can actually slow us down. Anyone who has ever rushed out  of  the  house  only  to  realize  that  their  keys  and  wallet  are  sitting  on  the   kitchen table knows this only too well. And it’s not just our efficiency that is reduced. The quality of the  experience  suffers too, as we become  less  aware  or  ‘mindful.’  Have  you ever eaten an entire meal without tasting any of it? Hurrying up doesn’t  just  give  us  less  time,  it  can  also  steal the pleasure and benefit from  the  time  that  we  do  have.  For  many  of  us,  hurrying  is  a  way  of  life.  Some   of  us  enjoy  the  thrill  that  it  gives  us  while  others  are
driven crazy by the constant  pressure  and  feel  that  their  lives are speeding up  to  an  unacceptable  degree.  Either  way,  there  are  almost  certainly  areas  of  our  life  that  could be 	. [3점]
① affected by temporary sufferings
② disturbed by inconsistent behaviors
③ enhanced by a little go-slow behavior
④ complicated by slow-but-steady actions
⑤ dominated by a little speedy decision making




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. The audience receives  a  sound  signal  entirely  through  the vibrations generated in  the  air,  whereas  in  a  singer  some of the auditory stimulus is  conducted  to  the  ear  through the singer’s own bones. Since these two ways of transferring sound have  quite  different  relative  efficiencies  at various  frequencies,  the  overall  quality  of  the  sound  will be quite different. You have probably experienced this when you have listened to your own voice, as on tape or through a public address system. It is easy to blame  the  ‘sound of  a  stranger’  on  ‘poor  electronics,’  but  this  is  only partly justified. The major effect comes  from  the  fact that you hear yourself differently from the way others hear
you. This is one of the main reasons why even the most accomplished singers have to listen  to  the  opinion  of  coaches and voice  teachers as to ‘how they sound,’ whereas   no concert violinist would have to do such a thing. To the violinist	 to someone else standing nearby. [3점]
* frequency: 주파수
① the coaches are more helpful than they are
② sounds spread a lot more widely than they do
③ the audience response is just as important as it is
④ playing sounds almost exactly the same as it does
⑤ the ‘sound of a stranger’ matters more than it does



34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Problems  can  be   distinguished   according to   whether they are reasonable or  unreasonable.  Reasonable  problems are of the kind that can be solved in a step-by-step
manner. A crossword puzzle is of this nature. Given a sufficient vocabulary,  the  empty  spaces  can  be  filled  in  one by  one.  Unreasonable  problems,  (A)  ,  cannot  be treated this way because the task contains some ‘trick’ or ‘catch’  that  must  be  understood  before  someone  can   arrive at a solution. This feature frustrates any step-by-step process that proceeds without the realization that  “things  aren’t  what  they  seem.”   (B)   ,   successful   problem  solving in these cases requires that the person acquire an insight into the nature of the trick. Riddles provide commonplace instances of such  insight  problems,  such  as  the classic riddle that the Sphinx posed to Oedipus.

(A) (B)
① in contrast …… Hence
② in contrast …… Nevertheless
③ for example …… Hence
④ for example …… Besides
⑤ in addition …… Nevertheless
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　School physical education programs should  offer  a  balanced variety of activities that allow young people to develop ability in lifetime activities that are personally meaningful and  enjoyable.  A  balance  should  exist   in  any physical  education  program among team,  dual, and individual (lifetime) sports. ① Team sports such as basketball  and  soccer  provide  an  opportunity  for  students to develop skills and to enjoy  working  and  competing together as a team. ② However, in many school physical education programs,  team  sports  dominate  the  curriculum  at the expense of various individual and dual sports, like  tennis, swimming, badminton, and golf.  ③ In  such  cases,  the students lose the opportunity to  develop  skills  in  activities  that  they  can  participate  in  throughout  their   adult lives. ④ Baseball, in particular, is one of the most popular sports  frequently  broadcast  on  TV.  ⑤ Only  through a  balanced  program  of  team,  dual,  and  individual  sports   is it possible to develop well-rounded individuals.
* dual: 둘의



[36～37] 주어진 글  다음에  이어질 글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　Cultural characteristics are not only  passed  from  parents to children, but may be passed on from any one individual to another by word of mouth or by writing.

(A) Like those infectious diseases, cultural habits  such  as  pop music preferences  and  clothing  fashions  may  spread very quickly nowadays, especially through the media of radio and television.
(B) So some cultural  changes  may  be  adopted  quite  quickly  by  a  whole  population.  Transmission   of culture is rather like transmission of  an  infection.  Flu  and  colds  spread  very  quickly,  especially  with  the large amount of contact  that  people  now  have  with  each other.
(C) However, other deep-rooted cultural characteristics of races and racial subgroups are much more difficult to change. These are the cultural patterns that are  so resistant  to  alteration  that  they  have  the  appearance   of being inherent.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.




(A) Studies suggest  that  you  would  not.  In  fact,  people  are more attracted to individuals who are consistently negative than to people who initially behave  positively and then switch to negative behavior.
(B) The reason  is  this:  people  who  start  out  being  nice  get  our  hopes  up,  so  the  letdown  we  experience   when we discover that  they  are  not  nice  makes  it  worse than if they had acted badly from the start.
(C) This effect reflects what happens to attraction when a person’s behavior moves from positive to negative or  from negative to positive. For example, if someone seemed very nice to you early in  the  interaction,  but  then began to act like a fool, would you  be  more  attracted  to  that  person  than  if  that  person  were  a  fool from the start?
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)






[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
People make extensive use of searching images. One unexpected context is sorting. Suppose you have a bag  of small hardware ― screws, nails, and  so  on ― and  you  decide to  organize  them  into  little  jars.  You  dump  the  stuff out on a table and begin separating the items into  coherent groups. ( ① ) It  is  possible  to  do  this  by  randomly picking up individual objects, one by one,  identifying  each  one,  and  then  moving  it  to  the  appropriate jar. ( ② ) But what most people do is very different. ( ③ ) They  put  them  in  the  jar  and  then  go  back and do the same  for  a  different  kind  of  item.  (  ④ ) So the sorting sequence is nonrandom, producing runs  of  items  of  a  single  type.  (  ⑤ )  It  is  a  faster,  more  efficient  technique,  and  much  of  the  increased  efficiency  is due to the use of searching images. [3점]

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?



The spoonful of 95℃ soup hitting  your  foot  hurts,  but not as badly as it would if you accidentally spilled  the entire pot of 95℃ soup on your foot.

　Heat and  temperature  are  two  quantities  that  can  be easily confused. Imagine cooking a  very  large  pot  of  chicken soup on  the  stove.  Let’s  suppose  you  heat  the  soup until it is 95℃, quite  hot.  (  ① )  You  grab  a  spoon and take out a spoonful of soup to taste. ( ② )  As  you  remove  the  spoonful  of  soup  from  the  pot,  it  has  the  same temperature as  the  larger  sample.  (  ③ )  Unfortunately, as you bring the soup towards your mouth to taste  it,  the spoon slips from your hand, pouring its  contents  on  your  bare foot. ( ④ ) If both the spoonful  and  the  pot  full  of  soup have the same temperature, why would  the  larger  sample  cause  more  damage  if  it  came  in  contact  with  your skin? ( ⑤ ) The answer to the question lies in the difference between temperature and heat.












In business organizations, compared with the functional managers  who  generally  (A)  what  forms  a system, project managers focus on (B) all of its elements.
(A) (B)
① analyze	…… splitting
② analyze	…… combining
③ modify	…… distributing
④ assemble …… dividing
⑤ assemble …… blending



이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 


























41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do Old Feeding Habits Work?
② No More Instant Foods for Kids
③ Kids Today Need Table Manners
④ Time to Switch to Organic Food!
⑤ Homemade Pudding Makes Us Perfect

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① counterproductive	② beneficial	③ invaluable
④ unconventional	⑤ constructive

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
　In 1887, when  the  land  was  up  for  sale,  grandpa  bought two hundred acres from the  Granger  family.  In  1918, (a) he  bought  another  two  hundred.  It  was  good  rich land. However, there were  bank  loans  for  and  taxes  on the land. Unfortunately, there had not been enough money from the cotton to  pay  both  of  them  and  live  on.  To  make things worse, the price of cotton dropped in 1930.

(C)
　When  he  came  back  from  Louisiana,  I  asked   papa why he had to go away  and  why  the  land  was  so important. (c) He took  my  hand  and  said  in  his  quiet  way: “Look out  there,  Cassie.  All that  belongs  to  you. You will never have to live  on  other  people’s  land.  As  long as the family  survives,  you  will  have  your  own  place. That’s  important.  You  may  not  understand  now,  but one day you will.” I looked at papa  strangely,  for  I  knew that all the land did not belong to me.

(D) 
　That was why papa had gone to work, ending up in Louisiana in 1931. (d) He set out looking for work, first  going far north and south, and finally west into Louisiana.     It was there he found  work  laying  track  for  the  railroad. He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not returning until the deep winter. The following spring after   the planting was  finished,  (e) he  did  the  same.  Now  it  was 1933, and papa was again in Louisiana laying track.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① ‘grandpa’는 1887년에 200에이커의 땅을 샀다.
② 1930년에 면화 가격이 하락했다.
③ ‘big  mama’는 60대에 목화밭 일을 하지 않았다.
④ ‘I’는 ‘papa’에게 왜 그 땅이 중요한지 물었다.
⑤ ‘papa’는 Louisiana에서 철로를 놓는 일을 한 적이 있다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지	1



6.  대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는  것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① They’ll be done in an hour.
② They were ready yesterday.
③ Let’s see if they’re my pants.
④ I tried, but I couldn’t fix them.
⑤ They’ll go shopping tomorrow.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’m glad you love my new menu.
② Too many cooks won’t be helpful.
③ I’ll order more tomatoes for the dinner.
④ That’s too bad. The tomatoes aren’t fresh.
⑤ I’m sorry. I’ll call and change the order now.


3. 다음을  듣고, 여자가  하는  말의  목적으로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 달리기 대회를 홍보하려고
② 수질 오염 문제를 알리려고
③ 달리기의 장점을 설명하려고
④ 강변 공원 개장을 안내하려고
⑤ 자선 행사 도우미를 모집하려고



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 놀이는 아동의 학습 동기를 높인다.
② 뮤지컬 관람은 예술적 감수성을 높인다.
③ 취미 생활은 스트레스 해소에 유익하다.
④ 뮤지컬 수업은 아동의 자신감을 키워 준다.
⑤ 수업 시 아동의 흥미를 고려할 필요가 있다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 축구 코치 － 선수	② 작곡가 － 지휘자
③ 영화 감독 － 소설가	④ 사진 작가 － 영화 배우
⑤ 상담 교사 － 학생






7. 대화를  듣고, 남자가  여자를  위해  할  일로  가장  적절한  것을 고르시오.
① 여행 책자 보내기	② 항공권 예약하기
③ 여행 일자 확인하기	④ 호텔 정보 검색하기
⑤ 관광 가이드 구하기

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지하철을 이용하는 이유를 고르시오.
① 자동차 연료비가 올라서	② 교통 체증을 피하려고
③ 자동차가 고장 나서	④ 환경을 보호하려고
⑤ 운동량을 늘리려고

9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36	② $45	③ $50	④ $63	⑤ $70

10. 대화를  듣고, 현장  학습에  관해  두  사람이  언급하지  않은 것을 고르시오.
① 활동 종류	② 예약 인원	③ 날짜
④ 결제 수단	⑤ 준비 물품

11. Bamboo Pond Restaurant에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치 하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 중국의 Beijing에 위치하고 있다.
② 건축하는 데 2년 이상이 걸렸다.
③ 공연장에서 전통 쇼가 매일 열린다.
④ 아이들이 놀 수 있는 공간이 있다.
⑤ 200명의 요리사를 고용하고 있다.




2	


12. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고, 두  사람이  선택할  수업을 고르시오.



①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Sure. Let’s encourage more students to sign up.
② Perfect! Please tell me how I can contact him.
③ Perhaps we should just cancel the contest.
④ Unfortunately, I cannot change the topic.
⑤ Terrific! You’ll be the best judge ever.

14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① Good for you. You’re going to major in robotics.
② I’m sorry. I can’t participate in volunteer activities.
③ That’s too bad. You really wanted to attend the lecture.
④ In fact, I already taught what he talked about yesterday.
⑤ That’s okay. I was happy to help out at the nursing home.

15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고, Jessica가  Brian에게  할  말로  가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jessica:   	
① You can help me run my own blog.
② You’re the most competent manager.
③ Your blog is helpful to fix the problem.
④ You shouldn’t blame your team members.
⑤ You should focus on your work in the office.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 교육 매체의 보급 현황
② 광고 매체의 유형별 특징
③ 멀티미디어 사용의 부작용
④ 광고에 나타난 문화적 고정관념
⑤ 대중 매체에 대한 연령별 선호도

17. 언급된 매체가 아닌 것은?
① newspapers	② television	③ magazines
④ posters	⑤ Internet


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

Dear Supporter:

I am writing to ask you to financially support the Marine Biodiversity Preservation Campaign. Global marine biodiversity is increasingly endangered, and coral reefs are among the most threatened marine environments on Earth. This is particularly true for the reefs in the Coral Triangle Region. With your donation, we can preserve fragile coral reefs around the world. For more information on how to donate, please visit www.marinebio.org/reefs. Thank you.
Sincerely, Braulio Ferreira
* coral reef: 산호초
① 산호초 특별 전시회를 홍보하려고
② 환경 보호 지원 정책을 공모하려고
③ 산호초 보호를 위한 기부를 부탁하려고
④ 해양 생태계 보호 법률 제정을 촉구하려고
⑤ 산호초 다양성에 관한 연구 결과를 설명하려고

19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
　On my first day in the Emergency Center, I was about to drink my coffee when the first call came. I quickly picked up the line, “9-1-1.” My voice was trembling and my heart was racing. A woman cried, “My husband’s not breathing!” I instructed her to begin CPR. I was trying to be as steady as I could, but I was shaking. The situation was absolutely critical. While she was performing CPR, I immediately notified the nearby hospital. After a few tense moments, she came back on the line and shouted, “Where’s the ambulance?” I  replied,  “It’s getting there as quickly as it can.”
① festive	② urgent	③ romantic
④ mysterious	⑤ monotonous

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Merely having goals clearly defined is not  sufficient,  for one must also know, moment by moment, what precisely  needs to be done. For instance, a salesperson’s aim is to conclude a sale profitably. However, each sale requires a different approach: Should he be pushy or laid back, authoritative or friendly? And what aspect of the product should he emphasize? The answers to these questions depend on variables that cannot be predicted in advance. This holds true not only for sales but also for most human activities. One must select a particular strategy appropriate to the occasion  and follow the chosen course of action. Doing so will ensure more lasting success in reaching one’s goals.
① 비판적 분석에 기반을 두고 목표 설정을 해야 한다.
② 목표 달성을 위해 상황에 맞는 전략을 사용해야 한다.
③ 경제 활성화 전략 수립을 위해 시장 조사를 해야 한다.
④ 성공적인 업무 수행을 위해 작업 환경을 개선해야 한다.
⑤ 고객의 신뢰를 얻기 위해 일관된 전략을 사용해야 한다.




	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　There is strong research evidence that children perform better in mathematics if music is incorporated in it. It has been shown that mathematics is related with music in various  known ways so much that not putting the relationship to good use in and out of school could only be to our disadvantage. Researchers at a Los Angeles school found that 136 second year elementary school pupils who learned to play the piano and read music improved their numeracy skills. This could be so since learning music emphasizes thinking in space and  time, and when pupils learn rhythm, they are learning ratios, fractions and proportions. Other researchers investigated the ways in which first and third grade teachers could integrate music into their regular math classrooms. They concluded that music-math integrated lessons had positive effects on three mathematical ability areas of modeling, problem solving and application.
* fraction: 분수
① 음악과 수학은 조기 교육이 필요하다.
② 음악보다 수학 교육의 중요성이 강조되고 있다.
③ 음악이 수학적 능력을 향상시키는 데 도움이 된다.
④ 수학은 문제  해결  능력에  기본이  되는  학문이다.
⑤ 수학적 원리를 음악 교육 현장에 반영하는 것이 좋다.








22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Do you have the emotional state of mind to become a leader? People pay close attention to a leader’s subtle expressions of emotion through body language and facial expression. Some emotions such as enthusiasm can quickly become contagious. Others, such as depression or discouragement, can drag down the entire organization. Leaders with positive emotional states of mind are like human magnets. People naturally gravitate to them and want to follow them. Such leaders inspire enthusiasm in their organizations and attract the best people to work for them. Conversely, leaders who emit negative emotional states of mind, who are irritable and bossy, repel people and have few followers.
* contagious:  전염성의, 전파하는
** repel: 쫓아버리다
① reasons for leaders to hide their emotions
② influence of leaders’ emotional states on people
③ necessity for analyzing leaders’ states of mind
④ various ways of staying away from bad leaders
⑤ ways of strengthening emotional bonds among leaders
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Effective coaches prioritize. They focus on a single task instead of trying to multitask. They understand that multitasking is another way of saying you are going to complete several tasks, none of which are going to be very good. Yuhong Jiang, professor of psychology at Harvard University, points out that the brain isn’t built to concentrate  on two things at once. It works more slowly if it tries to. Effective coaches focus on those things that need to get done and separate out everything else. Separating what’s important from what’s not important is prioritizing. Ineffective coaches fail to put the big tasks first. They either believe they have unlimited time, thinking that they will have more time tomorrow to get something done, or they underestimate how much time they really do have. They have no ability to  estimate how long a task will take.
① How Effective Coaches Approach Tasks
② Why Psychologists Support Multitasking
③ New Horizons of Research on Brain Science
④ Prioritizing Leads to Inefficiency in Performance
⑤ Everything Has Side Effects, But Not Multitasking!

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
5 or More Times per Day, Canada, 2008












　The above graph shows the percentages of fruit and vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day by age group and gender in Canada in 2008. ① Most notably, in each age group, the percentage of female consumption of fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day was higher than that of males. ② Across all age groups, less than 50 percent of males consumed fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day.
③ Among female groups, the 25 to 34 age group showed the highest percentage; among male groups, the 12 to 17 age group did so. ④ The percentage gap between males and females in fruit and vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day was smallest in the 12 to 17 age group, and largest in the 18 to 24 age group. ⑤ The percentage of female consumption of fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day in the 18 to 24 age group was higher than that of the 35 to 44 age group by 0.1 percentage point.




4	


25. Richard Porson에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
　Richard Porson, one of Britain’s most notable classical scholars, was born on Christmas in 1759. His talents were recognized early, and he was sent to Eton College by wealthy sponsors at 15. Four years later, he entered Cambridge University. He significantly improved Greek texts and edited four plays written by Euripides. In 1806, he was elected Principal Librarian at the newly founded London Institution. During his lifetime, he collected a great many books on classical literature. Although the number  of books he owned  in total is simply unknown, an episode about his passion for books is well-known: he carried so many books that he was able to pull book after book out of his pocket when a student tried to show off his knowledge of Greek writers. Despite his fame as a classical scholar, he actually published little. On September 25, 1808, three months before reaching age 49, Porson died.
① 1759년 크리스마스에 태어났다.
② Euripides가 쓴 희곡 4편을 편집했다.
③ 고전 문학에 관한 수많은 책을 수집했다.
④ 책에 대한 열정과 관련된 일화가 있다.
⑤ 명성에 걸맞게 많은 책을 출판했다.



26. 수영 강사 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

Looking for Swimming Instructors
　The Little Swimmers Program is now looking for swimming instructors.
－ It is a summer vacation swimming program for children aged 8-10.
－ It is a 4-week program beginning on August 1.
Requirements
－ Over 20 years of age
－ Previous experience in teaching children
－ Lifeguard and first aid certifications
　Applicants should download the application form from the website at www.littleswimmersclub.com. After completing the form, submit it by e-mail at lsp@me.com no later than July 15. For additional inquiries, please contact us at 123-456-7890 or visit our website.

① 프로그램은 8월 1일부터 5주간 계속된다.
② 지원자의 나이 제한이 없다.
③ 지원자는 어린이를 가르친 경험이 있어야 한다.
④ 이메일로 지원서를 제출할 수 없다.
⑤ 추가 문의는 전화로만 할 수 있다.
27. 
11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?



11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION

　Graduating students, it’s party time! Come and join us. We’ll make the last unforgettable memories of our high school life. The celebration includes dinner, a photo slide show, music performances and dancing. You can bring up to two friends.
?Time & Date: 7:00 p.m. on May 22
?Location: Westhampton High School Gym
?Dress Code: Formal wear
?Entrance Fee: $20 per person

　This event is hosted by the Student Council. For more info, see the website: www.westhamptonhs.wsh.org.


① 음악 공연이 포함된다.
② 친구를 두 명까지 데려올 수 있다.
③ 복장 제한이 없다.
④ 입장료는 한 명당 20달러이다.
⑤ 학생회에서 주최한다.










28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The Internet and communication technologies play an ever-increasing role in the social lives of young people in developed societies. Adolescents have been quick to immerse themselves in technology with most ① using the Internet to communicate. Young people treat the mobile phone as an essential necessity of life and often prefer to use text messages to com municate w ith their friends. Y oung people also
② increasingly access social networking websites. As technology and the Internet are a familiar resource for young people, it is logical ③ what they would seek assistance from this source. This has been shown by the increase in websites that provide therapeutic information for young people. A number of ‘youth friendly’ mental health websites ④ have been developed. The information ⑤ presented often takes the form of Frequently Asked Questions, fact sheets and suggested links. It would seem, therefore, logical to provide online counselling for young people.




	 5


29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지
않은 것은?
　An Egyptian executive, after entertaining his Canadian  guest, offered him joint partnership in a new business venture. The Canadian, delighted with the offer, suggested that they meet again the next morning with their ① respective lawyers to finalize the details. The Egyptian never showed up. The surprised and disappointed Canadian tried to understand what had gone wrong: Did Egyptians ② lack punctuality? Was the Egyptian expecting a counter-offer? Were lawyers unavailable in Cairo? None of these explanations proved to be correct; rather, the problem was ③ caused by the different meaning Canadians and Egyptians attach to inviting lawyers. The Canadian regarded the lawyers’ ④ absence as facilitating the successful completion of the negotiation; the Egyptian interpreted it as signaling the Canadian’s mistrust of his verbal commitment. Canadians often use the impersonal formality of a lawyer’s services to finalize ⑤ agreements. Egyptians, by contrast, more frequently depend on the personal relationship between bargaining partners to accomplish the same purpose.
* punctuality: 시간 엄수












30. 밑줄 친 him[his]이  가리키는  대상이  나머지  넷과 다른  것은? Dad just laughed and walked out of the room still holding Slade in his arms. He had dressed him and now he put ① him in his chair. As Slade sat in his chair eating a biscuit that Dad had spread with butter and homemade strawberry jam, Mom walked into the kitchen. She took one look at her little boy and started laughing; ② his little face and hands were covered with biscuit and jam. She thought how really cute he was. “Honey, what have you done? Look at him. I will never get ③ him clean again. I guess when he gets through  eating  you can  take
④ him out and dump him in the bathtub.” Dad laughed. Slade giggled  and  tried  to  spit  biscuit all over Dad. It  didn’t hit
⑤ him because luckily he avoided the spray. That made Mom laugh even more and soon the little cabin was full of love and laughter.

[31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Early human societies were nomadic, based on hunting and gathering, and, in a shifting pattern of life in search of new
sources of food, qualities such as lightness, portability, and adaptability were dominant criteria. With the evolution of more settled rural societies based on agriculture, other characteristics, other traditions of form appropriate to the new patterns of life, rapidly emerged. It must be emphasized, however, that tradition was not static, but constantly subject to minute variations appropriate to people and their circumstances. Although traditional forms reflected the experience of social groups, specific manifestations could be adapted in various minute and subtle ways to suit individual users’ needs. A chair could keep its basic, accepted characteristics while still being closely shaped in detail to the physique and proportions of a specific person.   This   basic principle  of 	allowed a constant stream of incremental modifications to be introduced, which, if demonstrated by experience to be advantageous, could be integrated back into the mainstream of tradition. [3점]
* manifestation:  외적 형태, 표시
** physique: 체격
*** incremental:  (점진적으로) 증가하는
① dedication	② customization
③ cooperation	④ generalization
⑤ preservation



32. Investigators as a personality type place a high value on science, process, and learning. They excel at research, using
logic and the information gained through their senses to conquer complex problems. Nothing thrills them more than a “big find.” Intellectual, introspective, and exceedingly detail-oriented, investigators are happiest when they’re using their brain power to pursue what they deem as a worthy outcome. They 	, and they dislike overly structured environments that necessitate a set response to challenges. Investigators are not interested in leadership, and developing the  interpersonal  skills necessary to fuel collaboration is a hurdle for many of them. They may feel insecure in their ability to “keep up” in their fields and   can react badly when forced to put more important work on hold to complete a task that doesn’t intrigue them. [3점]
* introspective:  자기 성찰적인
** deem:  여기다, 생각하다
① attempt to go with the flow
② prefer to march to their own beat
③ dare to take the lead from the front
④ tend to work shoulder to shoulder
⑤ pay more attention to assigned tasks




6	


33. It is easy to find examples of correlations which are far
more systematic than could occur by chance and yet which it would be absurd to treat as evidence of a direct causal link. For instance, there is a high degree of correlation between shoe  size and vocabulary size: people with larger shoe sizes tend to have much larger vocabularies than people with smaller shoe sizes. But having larger feet does not cause anyone to gain a larger vocabulary; nor does having a large vocabulary cause your feet to grow. The obvious  explanation of the correlation is that children tend to have much smaller feet than adults, and, because children acquire their vocabularies gradually as they grow older, it is hardly surprising that, on average, people with smaller feet have smaller vocabularies. In other words, foot size and vocabulary size can be explained in terms of
 	  from infancy to adulthood: a cause which both observed phenomena have in common. [3점]
① by-products of language acquisition
② causal links between uncommon events
③ contrasts between physical and mental growth
④ cultural beliefs derived from social interactions
⑤ features of the process of human development







34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Feedback is usually most effective when you offer it at the earliest opportunity, particularly if your objective is to teach someone  a  skill. 	(A)	, if you are teaching your friend how to make your famous egg rolls, you provide a step-by-step commentary as you watch your pupil. If he makes a mistake, you don’t wait until the egg rolls are finished to tell him that he left out the cabbage. He needs immediate feedback to finish the rest of the sequence successfully. Sometimes,
          (B) , if a person is already sensitive and upset about something, delaying feedback can be wise. Use your critical thinking skills to analyze when feedback will do the most good. Rather than automatically offering immediate correction, use the just-in-time approach and provide feedback just before the person might make another mistake.
(A) (B)
① For example …… however
② For example …… as a result
③ In addition …… in fact
④ Similarly …… moreover
⑤ Similarly …… therefore

[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. 


(A) That is, the reader is the writer’s “customer” and one whose business or approval is one we need to seek. The more you know about your reader, the greater the chances you will meet his or her needs and expectations.
(B) Why? You were never asked what you were seeking, how much you could spend, or if the computer would be used for business or pleasure or your child’s homework assignments.
(C) In brief, the salesperson never considered or asked about your needs and preferences. Just as it would come as no surprise to learn the salesperson who was indifferent to a potential customer’s needs was soon out of a job,  the same holds true for writers who ignore their readers.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

36. 


(A) Consider Picasso’s Guernica, a huge (11-ft. × 25.6-ft.) painting in black, white, and grey that he made in  response to the slaughter of Spanish civilians by German and Italian warplanes during the Spanish Civil War. Images of a cruel war dominate the canvas.
(B) That definition seems too narrow, however, since works of art and natural objects may interest us in other ways than by being beautiful. Instead of evoking admiration of beauty, artists may evoke puzzlement, shock, and even disgust.
(C) This work is widely admired but not for being beautiful. So a better definition of aesthetics would be that it is the branch of philosophy that deals with the ways things please people in being experienced.
* slaughter: 대량 학살
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




	 7


[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37. 


　A 5-year-old doing addition problems by counting on makes the same error repeatedly, with responses such as: 7 + 3 = 9,    6 + 5 = 10 and 8 + 4 = 11. ( ① ) The teacher asks the pupil to show how these answers were obtained and notices that in doing the addition of 3 to 7, the pupil counts ‘seven, eight, nine’, while turning up three fingers in turn. (  ② ) The pupil  is ‘counting on 3 from 7’ but incorrectly starting at 7. ( ③ ) The teacher recalls similar errors that some pupils made when doing addition problems by counting on along a  number line. ( ④ ) This is immediately effective. ( ⑤ ) So  the  teacher reinforces this particular language pattern in subsequent oral work with the whole class.
39. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Scientific experiments should be designed to show that your hypothesis is wrong and should be conducted completely objectively with no possible subjective influence on the outcome. ① Unfortunately few, if any, scientists are truly objective as they have often decided long before the experiment is begun what they would like the result to be.
② This means that very often bias is (unintentionally) introduced into the experiment, the experimental procedure or the interpretation of results. ③ It is all too easy to justify to yourself why an experiment which does not fit with your expectations should be ignored, and why one which provides the results you ‘hoped for’ is the right one. ④ It is important  to draw a meaningful result from the experiment on  peer  group activities. ⑤ This can be partly avoided by conducting experiments ‘blinded’ and by asking others to check your data or repeat experiments.

40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]















38.
Still, many believe we will eventually reach a point at which conflict with the finite nature of resources is inevitable.

Can we sustain our standard of living in the same ecological

space while consuming the resources of that space? This question is particularly relevant since we are living in an era   of skyrocketing fuel costs and humans’ ever-growing carbon footprints. ( ① ) Some argue that we are already  at  a  breaking point because we have nearly exhausted the Earth’s finite carrying capacity. ( ② ) However, it’s possible that innovations and cultural changes can expand Earth’s capacity.  ( ③ ) We are already seeing this as the world economies are increasingly looking at “green,” renewable industries  like  solar and hydrogen energy. ( ④ ) That means survival could ultimately depend on getting the human population below its carrying capacity. ( ⑤ ) Otherwise, without population control, the demand for resources will eventually exceed an ecosystem’s ability to provide it. [3점]







?



(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① insufficient …… preserve	② insufficient …… create
③ poisonous   …… purify	④ poisonous …… reshape
⑤ abundant	…… clean




8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)

























41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Animal Society: A Mirror of Ourselves
② A New Perspective for Studying Zoology
③ What Has Science Done for You Recently?
④ Why Does Science Need Critical Thinking?
⑤ Understanding Science: Society Does Matter


42. 윗글의  빈칸에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  것은? [3점]
① vacuum	② pattern	③ moment
④ community	⑤ conflict


[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(C)
　That’s why Anderson took the job in the first place even though some of his friends attempted to persuade him to be a lawyer or businessman. (c) He shook his head and opened his eyes. As he struggled to get up, he saw something fall from his bag. It was a birthday card from his students, decorated with all kinds of odd-shaped but colorful hearts and scribbled names. “Dear Mr. Anderson, happy birthday to you. It’s our surprise gift for you. We love you!” Anderson could not help but smile. He already felt much better.

(D)
　Today was especially busy and wearying, and Anderson wondered whether he was really suitable for teaching. He was stressed as kids constantly sought (d) his attention. At snack time, Emily wanted him to open her milk carton, so he did. As she was drinking, Scott spilled his milk and Anderson had to help (e) him clean it up. Then Jenny, Andrew, Mark, and . . . . Kids never ceased. However, he still loved them. That’s also what he had said in the interview for the position.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Anderson에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 1학년 학생들을 가르친다.
② 인터뷰 때 가졌던 강한 확신을 떠올렸다.
③ 친구들로부터 법률가나 사업가가 되라는 권유를 받았다.
④ 가방에서 떨어진 생일 카드는 부모님으로부터 온 것이었다.
⑤ 간식 시간에 Emily의 우유팩을 열어 주었다.





2015학년도 10월 고3 전국연합학력평가 문제지
영어 영역	1
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① All right. Have a nice trip.
② I see. I’ll call and invite her.
③ Okay. I’ll try my best to be there.
④ Sorry, the party has been delayed.
⑤ No, I’m not taking her to the party.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I’ll put the boat on the river later.
② I get seasick whenever I’m on a boat.
③ I taught myself from a book in the library.
④ I wanted to make a boat instead of a train.
⑤ I don’t know how to make things out of paper.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르 시오.
① 천연 화장품의 장단점
② 겨울철 피부 관리 요령
③ 화장품의 올바른 사용법
④ 환절기 피부 질환의 원인
⑤ 습도가 피부에 미치는 영향



4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 애완동물 유기 방지를 위한 교육 프로그램이 있어야 한다.
② 공공장소에서 애완동물 관련 규정을 준수해야 한다.




7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to reserve a hotel room
② to take care of the kids for her
③ to go to the film festival together
④ to look for a basketball coach
⑤ to recommend a good movie

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 오디션 심사를 맡을 수 없는 이유를 고르 시오.
① 구직 면접이 있어서	② 진료 예약이 있어서
③ 친척을 마중해야 해서	④ 보고서를 완성해야 해서
⑤ 결혼식에 참석해야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $90	② $108	③ $110	④ $118	⑤ $120

10. 대화를 듣고, Kabri Campground에 관하여 두 사람이 언급하


③ 애완동물의 예방접종을 정기적으로
실시해야
한다.
지 않은
것을 고르시오.

④ 유기 동물을 위한 보호소를 늘려야
⑤ 유기 동물 입양 절차를 간소화해야
한다.
한다.

① 위치
④ 이용

시간
② 규모
⑤ 샤워 시설
③ 요금




5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 여행사 직원 - 고객
② 공항 세관 직원 - 여행객
③ 마라톤 코치 - 마라톤 선수
④ 여권 발급 담당자 - 여권 신청자
⑤ 봉사 단체 직원 - 봉사 활동 지원자
11. 
Teen Council에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오. [3점]
① 전시회와 패션쇼를 열었던 적이 있다.
② 매주 월요일과 목요일에 모임을 갖는다.
③ 예술을 사랑하는 12명의 학생들로 구성되어 있다.
④ 온라인으로 지원을 받는다.
⑤ 중학생과 고등학생 모두 지원할 수 있다.




2	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택한 이동식 주택을 고르시오.
Portable Cabins




①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:  	
① I’ll get along well with my coworkers.
② I’ll find out after the training session ends.
③ I’m nervous about my job interview tomorrow.
④ I don’t think company life will be as easy as I thought.
⑤ I have no idea who will be in charge of the department.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:  	
① That’s amazing. I guess they’re safer than I thought.
② I agree. Traffic regulations should be strengthened.
③ Congratulations. Your test was successful.
④ I’m disappointed. I didn’t get my driver’s license.
⑤ Of course. Good driving requires a lot of experience.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Kate의 아버지가 Kate에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Kate’s father: Kate,  	
① can you help me find my old stuff in the basement?
② how about giving your old stuff to a charity?
③ I’m really proud that I got a promotion.
④ we should take everything to our new home.
⑤ you may find something useful among the donations.

[16 ~ 17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 전자 제품 무상 수리를 안내하려고
② 새로 출시된 가전제품을 홍보하려고
③ 가전제품의 관리 요령을 알려 주려고
④ 전기 요금을 줄이는 방법을 소개하려고
⑤ 쓰지 않는 가전제품 수거 절차를 설명하려고

17. 언급된 가전제품이 아닌 것은?
① refrigerators	② microwaves
③ air conditioners	④ washing machines
⑤ vacuum cleaners
18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?

① 새로 제공할 메뉴의 승인을 요청하려고
② 식당 음식에 대한 선호도를 조사하려고
③ 식당 직원의 충원 계획을 공지하려고
④ 행사에 필요한 음식 준비를 부탁하려고
⑤ 요리 강습에서 실습할 음식에 대해 논의하려고





19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　We all enjoy the pleasure of being left alone with a good book. But sometimes after several hours of immersion we lift our heads and look around, suddenly struck by the quiet, the absence of others. In this situation, we are suffering from reading­induced loneliness. The solution is to read in the company of other people who are reading ? whether in a public space such as a caf? or a library, or in your own home, with your reading friend or partner at the other end of the sofa. Next time you look up, you’ll see someone else similarly immersed, and you won’t feel alone at all. Reading can be sociable. Consider joining a reading group in which everybody takes turns reading aloud from a novel. Reading a book collaboratively is a wonderful way to share an otherwise internal and solitary experience.
① 책을 한 번만 읽지 말고 여러 번 읽어라.
② 오랫동안 읽지 않은 책은 도서관에 기증해라.
③ 책을 혼자 읽지 말고 다른 사람들과 함께 읽어라.
④ 책을 읽고 난 후에 글로 써서 생각을 정리해라.
⑤ 집중력 향상을 위해 소리 내어 책을 읽어라.




영어 영역	3
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　In professional sports these days, it is not unusual ① to hear players and coaches talking about process. They talk about focusing on the process and following the process. Rarely ② do they talk about scoring a goal, a touchdown, a home run, a point, or achieving a good shot. It’s all about process. So, what do they mean by this? What they mean by focusing on the process is that they focus on the actions they need to ③ be taken in order to achieve their desired result. They don’t focus on the result itself. The reasoning here is ④ that if you follow the steps required, then the result will look after itself. This is one of the big differences between professional and amateur sportspeople. Amateurs often focus on the result and forget about ⑤ doing all the things that would almost automatically lead to the result.

21. 다음 글에 드러난 Billy의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The departmental head took Billy to view his own private office. It was a room situated in St. Joseph’s Hall on the edge of the college grounds. “This room was formerly used as a guest room for visitors,” she explained. “I hope you’ll be comfortable here.” Comfortable! That’s putting it mildly, Billy thought. A shiver of delight ran down his spine when he saw his name in capital letters on the door: MR BILLY HOPKINS, SENIOR LECTURER IN EDUCATION. The room
was spacious and there was a large window overlooking the college grounds. Billy sat at his desk and looked out at the neat lawns and flower­filled gardens. Somewhere in the college a choir was singing and his joy was complete.
① happy	② envious	③ ashamed
④ lonely	⑤ nervous

22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The human species and human culture evolved through interaction with the entire communities of animals and plants. Of the two great influences that make humans what they are, heredity  and environment,  environment  is undoubtedly the more powerful. After all, heredity itself encodes the results of millions of years of environmental influences on the human genome. Even genetic mutations are, to some extent, caused by environmental factors. Evolution is largely the result of natural selection that takes place because humans, during their history of development as a species, have been part of biotic communities in which their interactions with other species of animals and plants have decided whether or not they survived and reproduced.
* mutation: 돌연변이
① influences of humans on environment
② roles of heredity in human behaviors
③ necessity of further research on genome
④ problems of human separation from nature
⑤ impact of environment on human evolution

[23 ~ 24] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
23. When we lived as foragers with earthbound religions, animals were the first beings, world­shapers, and the teachers and ancestors of people. When we became agriculturalists and looked to the heavens for instruction about the seasons and bad weather, we saw animal forms among the stars. Of the forty­eight Ptolemaic constellations, all but a few are organic, and twenty­five are named for
animals. Of the twenty­two more that were added in the 17th century, nineteen have animal names. When people built huge earthworks to appeal to the powers of heavens, they built them in animal forms. Some in Peru are over a mile long. One in Ohio is in the shape of a giant snake with an egg in its mouth. [3점]
* constellation: 별자리
① Human Fascination with Animal Forms
② Efforts to Record Disappearing Species
③ Origins of the Names of Heavenly Bodies
④ Influence of Animals on Scientific Progress
⑤ Historical Background of Astronomical Progress
















24. Bargain hunting represents one of the significant reasons why people shop. It’s all about the excitement of finding merchandise at surprisingly low prices and being able to take advantage of such discounts. The thrill of bargain hunting motivates shoppers and gives them a feeling of winning over the retailers. It’s an important part of the shopping mentality and one that retailers could probably take
better advantage of. How many retailers set out with the explicit goal of literally raising the adrenaline levels of their shoppers by offering prices that are truly unbelievable or exciting? This is surely one way to spur sales and increase the interest of shoppers. Everyday sale prices are not the same ― the bargain must truly stand out in the consumer’s mind as a good deal that is just too exceptional to pass up.
① Bargain Hunting: A Motivation for Shopping
② Customer Service Outweighs Price
③ Low Prices, Low Productivity
④ Online Shopping Causes Crisis for Retailers
⑤ To Shop or Not to Shop? Just Say No to Shopping




4	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Average Annual Entertainment Expenditures of US Urban and Rural Households, 2011














　The above graph shows the average annual entertainment expenditures of US urban and rural households in 2011. ① Of the five categories, urban households spent more on fees and admissions and on audio and visual equipment and services than rural households, while rural households spent more than urban households in the other three categories. ② Both urban and rural households spent the most on audio and visual equipment and services. ③ In contrast, the smallest amount of money was spent on toys, hobbies, and playground equipment by both urban and rural households. ④ The largest gap between the expenditures of urban and rural households, amounting to more than $300, was found in the category of fees and admission. ⑤ However, the smallest gap between urban and rural expenditures was shown in the category of pets, on which urban households spent about
$500 and rural households about $700.

26. Allan Houser에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Allan Houser created contemporary Apache sculpture. As a child, he listened to his father’s stories about the adventures of Chief Geronimo. This gave him a deep attachment to his ancestral background, an attachment that is shown in his artwork. Houser studied at the Indian School in Santa Fe, New Mexico, and then remained in Santa Fe, where he worked as a freelance artist. During World War II, he traveled to California, where he became interested in the media of sculpture. He created works in a variety of styles and mastered bronze, metal, and stone sculpture. Houser’s designs are modern, yet firmly rooted in the special tradition of his Native American forefathers. He drew inspiration from both past and present, but like all successful artists, his sculpture transcends race and language. The sculpture Reverie shows a distinct Native American influence, but it can be appreciated by anyone, regardless of his or her background.
① 자기 선조에 대한 깊은 애착을 갖게 되었다.
② Santa Fe에서 학교를 다녔고 미술가로 활동했다.
③ California에 가서 조각에 관심을 갖게 되었다.
④ 조각 작품의 재료로 금속만을 고집하였다.
⑤ 그의 조각 작품은 인종과 언어를 초월한다.
27. 
밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Grandma put her things down on the sand and walked over to Phoebe on the shore by the water. Schools of minnows were everywhere in the crystal clear water. Phoebe was going crazy watching the minnows. ① She said, “Grandma, I want to catch a fish.” When ② she handed Phoebe the very small net, Phoebe immediately tried to scoop up the minnows. It took Phoebe less than ten minutes, and even that was too long, for Phoebe to catch ③ her first minnow. After many frustrating attempts, ④ she finally screeched with joy and ran to Grandma sitting on her beach towel. “Grandma, look, I caught a fish!” Phoebe gave the minnow to Grandma, which she kept for Phoebe in a clear, plastic container as a souvenir of Phoebe catching ⑤ her first fish.
* minnow: 피라미



28. Lowell High School Movie Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

① 학년을 끝마치는 것을 축하하는 행사이다.
② 실내에서 대형 스크린에 영화를 상영한다.
③ 교사들이 게임과 상품을 마련한다.
④ 상영될 영화에 출연한 배우가 참석한다.
⑤ 식비는 입장료에 포함되지 않는다.




영어 영역	5
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

29. New Wood Student Woodworking Competition에 관한 다음
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

① 참가비가 없다.
② 등록 마감일과 제출 마감일이 같다.
③ 부문별로 3등까지 상금을 수여한다.
④ 4개의 참가 부문이 있다.
⑤ 참가자당 작품을 2개까지 제출할 수 있다.

[30 ~ 32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
30. The idea that artists have a unique message  to communicate is only a few hundred years old. For most of European history,  artists  were  considered  primarily craftsmen. When a noble contracted with a painter for a work, the contract specified details like the quantities of gold and blue paint to appear in the work, the deadline, and penalties for delays. A contract in 1485 between the painter Domenico Ghirlandaio and a client specified that Ghirlandaio would “colour the panel at his own expense with good colours and with powdered gold on such ornaments as demand it ... and the blue must be ultramarine of the value about four florins per ounce”. In some contracts, artists were paid by the time worked rather than a fixed price for the completed work. These contract details show us that art
was considered to be a 	― a very different concept of the artist than we hold today. [3점]
* florin: 2실링짜리 옛날 영국 동전
① trade	② hobby	③ symbol
④ miracle	⑤ blessing
31. 
Dependency never goes away; it just becomes more subtle
and systemic. Without someone to feed us, change our diapers, or carry us from place to place, we would never survive to grow up. Later, all these forms of help fade into the background. They no longer look like mommy and daddy putting the spoon in our mouths. They look like the supermarket, the restaurant, the sewer system, the electrical grid, running water, and the emergency room. Help becomes pervasive and invisible, but it’s still there. For every one thing we think we have done on our own, there are a dozen things that had to be provided for us by others. We live in a dense fabric of mutual aid. That’s what makes us a social species. Even when we go out to compete in the world for money and praise, we never achieve on our own. We build upon parents, relatives, friends, teachers, and neighbors who helped along the way. 	.
[3점]
① Hope is a wing that gives you victory over obstacles
② Help is to each of us as water is to the fish
③ Heaven helps those who help themselves
④ Humility makes great men twice honorable
⑤ The living person is independent with his individuality












32.  	. Birds that in the breeding season fight one another to death over territory may end up in the same flock during migration. I know this tendency firsthand from my fish, each time I redo one of my large tropical aquariums. Many fish, such as cichlids, are quite territorial, displaying with spread fins and chasing one another to keep their corner free of intruders. I clean my
tanks out every couple of years, during which time I keep the fish in a barrel. After a few days they are released back into the tank, which by then looks quite different from before. I am always amused at how they suddenly seek out the company of their own kind. Like best buddies, the biggest fighters now swim side by side, exploring their new environment together. Until, of course, they start to feel confident again, and claim a piece of real estate. [3점]
* intruder: 침입자
① Curiosity is nature’s original school of education
② Solitude makes you stronger and more independent
③ Some species suffer disadvantages from living in groups
④ Even bitter rivals seek companionship at times of danger
⑤ Bigger animals tend to feed alone or in small groups




6	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━

33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
[3점]
　Toys are cultural objects that children learn to play with in particular and culturally appropriate ways. Through participating in complex play, caregivers demonstrate traditional ways of object use. (A) , when a mother  models a telephone conversation during pretend play, she first dials the number, waits for a response, and only then begins to talk. If, while imitating the telephone conversation, the child forgets to dial the number, or mistakes the order of action, the mother may adjust the child’s actions, thus teaching the correct way of play. Parent-child object play is also a medium through which children practice real­life scenarios (e.g. doctor-patient, mother-baby). Children’s knowledge of cultural activities also contributes to the structure of parent-child play. When children play with familiar toys, they are more likely to facilitate pretend play, while parents serve as an audience. (B) , when novel  toys are used in the course of parent-child play, parents are more likely to start and organize the pretense.
* pretend play: 가상 놀이
35. 
(A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장
적절한 것은? [3점]
　Until the mid­20th century, only a few immigrants paid a visit to their homeland once or twice before they died, but most never returned to the land of their birth. This pattern has completely changed with the advent of globalization, coupled with the digital revolution that has (A) enhanced / hindered communication. As a result, immigration is a very different experience from what it was in the past. The ability of immigrant  families  to (B) object / reconnect	to their old culture via phone, television, and the Internet has changed their	approach	to	integration	into	mainstream	American society. This has also greatly influenced immigrant practices of socialization with children. Contacts with the country of origin are now more frequent, and result in more immigrant families being influenced to (C) abandon / maintain		cultural patterns from the homeland, and to attempt to influence their children to keep them.
(A) (B)	(C)

(A) (B)
① However	······	In contrast
② However	······	In other words
③ For example	······	In contrast
④ For example	······	In other words
⑤ In addition	······	Consequently












34. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Parents are commonly reluctant to grant their grown children equal footing with them as adults. This delay can persist into later life, especially if geographic distance prevents parents from witnessing their children’s success in jobs or relationships. ① More decisively than most life experiences, illness can cause  a change in such a relationship by forcing parents to accept help from their children. ② A father who decides to rely on his son to do his banking, for example, implicitly affirms his son’s capabilities as an adult. ③ Such reliance conveys a trust that may be deeply satisfying to the son. ④ Parents encourage creative activities in the child and participate with him in such activities. ⑤ By allowing his son to be a provider of help, the father actually gives emotionally more than he receives practically.








[36 ~ 37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
36.


(A) Although changes may be made, this synthesis is the formal interpretation of the data and provides the most logical explanation or reconstruction of the events and the identification of the remains.
(B) Next, laboratory analysis and research on the remains and evidence proceed. At some point, all of the data from the different labs and investigators comes together and is synthesized into the case report.
(C) The first phase is usually the discovery of the case. More likely than not, discovery is made by accident. The second phase is recovery of the remains and evidence. This and future phases require professional help.
* forensic: 과학 수사의
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)



영어 영역	7
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
37.	39.



(A) For example, if there is difficulty with work, the family, finances, and mental health will likely be impacted in a negative manner. Conversely, if an individual has employment that is fulfilling and rewarding, this will positively impact other pieces of the self.
(B) Each slice represents an important part of the self. There will be universal slices in each person’s pie, and there will also be slices unique to that specific individual’s personality.
(C) Some fairly universal slices may include health/well­being, home, family, work, finances, and relationships. Unique slices of the self can include hobbies, spirituality, and education. Each slice of the self impacts the others.
① (A) - (C) - (B)	② (B) - (A) - (C)
③ (B) - (C) - (A)	④ (C) - (A) - (B)
⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)




[38 ~ 39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.



　The essential oil, it has been said, is the heart and soul of a plant. ( ① ) It gives a plant its scent and may also drive away insects, attract bees and wasps for fertilization of the plant’s flowers, and protect the plant against decay, bacteria, and mold. ( ② ) Food manufacturers, for example, sometimes include essential oils in their products as a way of preventing bacterial growth. ( ③ ) The oils are purer and more healthful than chemical antibacterial agents, such as chlorine. ( ④ ) Many skincare products also make use of antibacterial essential oils. ( ⑤ ) In nature, these oils protect plants against bacteria, and they do the same for us when rubbed on the skin.










40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Lie detector tests base judgments of honesty on blood pressure, pulse, respiration, and vocal pitch, which the test assumes differ when people lie and when they tell the truth. However, lie detector tests have not proven particularly reliable. ( ① ) Now law enforcement has a new tool for detecting deception: the detail in stories told by people being questioned. ( ② ) New research indicates that when people lie, they develop a tight, bare­bones script and stick with it. ( ③ ) They do not include details and comments on context because that just adds to what they have to remember. ( ④ ) That is, people who are giving honest accounts tend to recall details about context ― what was happening at the time of the event, who was present ― that are not related to the main story. ( ⑤ ) The researchers explain that “if you’re telling the truth, this mental reinstatement of contexts triggers more and more external details.”
* mental reinstatement: 경험을 머릿속에 되살려 보기
















(A) (B)
① persuasive	······	stories
② persuasive	······	gestures
③ imaginative	······	stories
④ imaginative	······	images
⑤ responsive	······	gestures




8	영어 영역
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
[41 ∼ 42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.	(B)

(C)

(D)











41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Save Resources for a Rainy Day
② The Limits of Alternative Resources
③ Technology: A Solution to Resource Problems
④ Natural Resources: Precious but Rare
⑤ Is Renewable Energy Really Green?


42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① restricts	② expands	③ classifies
④ conceals	⑤ analyzes


[43 ~ 45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)





43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) - (D) - (C)	② (C) - (B) - (D)
③ (C) - (D) - (B)	④ (D) - (B) - (C)
⑤ (D) - (C) - (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a) ~ (e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① Josh는 반쯤 언 호수를 걸어서 건너기로 마음먹었다.
② Denise는 호숫가에 이르렀을 때 정신을 잃었다.
③ Levi는 George가 불러서 물 밖으로 나왔다.
④ Levi는 물 속에서 Josh에게 가까이 갈 수 없었다.
⑤ George와 Denise는 Levi의 목줄을 가져왔다.


	


2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1

6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I already ate dinner.
② No. I’ve never met him before.
③ Sure. Thanks for the invitation.
④ Yes. I bought a box of chocolates.
⑤ Good. I hate working on weekends.




2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I’ll pick up your daughter.
② You’re welcome. It’s my pleasure.
③ Wow, this winter is really cold.
④ I agree. The timing isn’t good.
⑤ Okay, let me take a look.


3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 교복 물려주기를 권장하려고
② 기부 행사 참여를 독려하려고
③ 생활 용품 절약을 장려하려고
④ 학교 식당 공사를 안내하려고
⑤ 학부모 간담회 일정을 공지하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 수면 문제를 해결하는 방법
② 휴대전화와 업무 효율성의 관계
③ 미디어 기기가 학습에 미치는 영향
④ 규칙적인 운동의 중요성
⑤ 충분한 낮잠의 필요성


5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 연출가 － 배우	② 작곡가 － 가수
③ 사회자 － 요리사	④ 식당 지배인 － 고객
⑤ 농장 주인 － 도매업자


7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① to remove election posters
② to take the adviser position
③ to cancel the student meeting
④ to speak out against school violence
⑤ to register as a presidential candidate

8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 독감에 걸려서
② 비행기를 놓쳐서
③ 동생을 돌봐야 해서
④ 회의에 참석해야 해서
⑤ 입장권을 구할 수 없어서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $9	② $16	③ $18	④ $20	⑤ $27

10. 대화를 듣고, 미용실에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 가게 이름	② 위치	③ 남자 이발 비용
④ 영업시간	⑤ 미용사 이름

11. science  essay  contest에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 고등학생이 참가할 수 있다.
② 에세이 주제가 두 가지이다.
③ 에세이 분량에 제한이 있다.
④ 온라인으로만 에세이 제출을 허용한다.
⑤ 참가자 전원에게 후원 기관 견학 기회를 준다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 선택할 패키지 상품을 고르시오.
Attraction Packages at Grandlife Amusement Park

①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:   	
① Set a time limit when making a presentation.
② The more knowledge, the better the interview.
③ The company buys your creativity, not your image.
④ Interviewing is no more than expressing yourself.
⑤ Too much confidence in your vision doesn’t help.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   	
① I’ll write it down for you then.
② You should share it with others.
③ You prepared a lot for the event.
④ I can memorize your phone number.
⑤ Let’s go to the history museum now.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Peter가 Sandra에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Peter: Sandra,  	
① I think you need to take a break for a while.
② I recommend you return your book soon.
③ I’d suggest changing where you study.
④ you’d better review what you learned.
⑤ you should’ve slept more last night.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① consequences of communication problems
② difficulties of managing a relationship
③ various merits of having hobbies
④ causes of conflict within a family
⑤ ways of making peace with family members

17. 언급된 물건이 아닌 것은?
① a letter	② a picture	③ cookies
④ earrings	⑤ flowers
18. 
다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　One difference between winners and losers is how they handle losing. Even for the best companies and most accomplished professionals, long track records of success are punctuated by slips, slides, and mini-turnarounds. Even the team that wins  the game might make mistakes and lag behind for part of it. That’s why the ability to recover quickly is so important. Troubles are ubiquitous. Surprises can fall from the sky like volcanic ash and appear to change everything. That’s why one prominent scholar said, “Anything can look like a failure  in the middle.” Thus, a key factor in high achievement is bouncing back from the low points.
① 경영의 전문화는 일류 기업의 조건이다.
② 위기 관리에는 전문가의 조언이 필요하다.
③ 합리적 소비는 필요와 욕구의 구분에서 비롯된다.
④ 폭넓은 인간 관계는 성공의 필수 요소이다.
⑤ 실패를 빨리 극복하는 것이 성공의 열쇠이다.

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　As I walked to the train station, I felt the warm sun on my back. I caught my train on time. It arrived at my destination ten minutes early, which was perfect, as I was due to present my new idea to the company at 10 a.m. The presentation went better than expected, and my manager seemed particularly pleased. Later that day, my manager called me into her office. She smiled at me and said, “James, you’ve been with us for six years now. How would you feel if I were to offer you the Sales Director position in London?” Sales Director in London! Wow! This was a dream come true for me. I couldn’t believe what I had just heard!
① joyful	② jealous	③ outraged
④ confused	⑤ indifferent

[20～21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. Many disciplines are better learned by entering into the doing than by mere abstract study. This is often the case with the most abstract as well as the seemingly more practical disciplines. For example, within the philosophical disciplines, logic must be learned through the use of examples and actual problem solving. Only after some time and struggle does the student begin to develop the insights and intuitions that enable him to see the centrality and relevance of this mode of thinking. This learning by doing is essential in many of the sciences. For instance, only after a good deal of observation do the sparks in the bubble chamber become recognizable as the specific movements of identifiable particles.
① history of science education
② limitations of learning strategies
③ importance of learning by doing
④ effects of intuition on scientific discoveries
⑤ difference between philosophy and science




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. The most normal and competent child encounters what  seem like insurmountable problems in living. But by playing them out, he may become able to cope with them in a step-by-step process. He often does so in symbolic ways that are hard for even him to understand, as he is reacting to inner processes whose origin may be buried deep in  his  unconscious. This may result in play that makes little sense to us at the moment, since we do not know the purposes  it  serves. When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best   to approve of the child’s play without interfering. Efforts to assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may divert him from seeking and eventually finding the solution that will serve him best.
① dangers of playing violent games to mental health
② beneficial influence of playing outdoors in childhood
③ children’s play as problem solving with minimal intervention
④ necessity of intervening in disputes between siblings
⑤ parental roles in children’s physical development













[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. At some time in their lives, most people pause to reflect on their own moral principles and on the practical implications of those principles, and they sometimes think about what principles people should have or which moral standards can   be best justified. When a person accepts a moral principle, naturally the person believes the principle is important  and well justified. But there is more to moral principles than that. When a principle is part of a person’s moral code, that person is strongly motivated toward the conduct required by the principle, and against behavior that conflicts with that principle. The person will tend to feel guilty when his or her own conduct violates that principle and to disapprove of
others whose behavior conflicts with it. Likewise, the person will tend to hold in esteem those whose conduct shows an abundance of the motivation required by the principle.
① Feeling Guilty? Check Your Self-Esteem First
② Do Not Let Your Moral Principles Change!
③ Moral Integrity: A Principle of Philosophy
④ How Do People Form Their Personalities?
⑤ Moral Principles: Guiding Our Conduct
23. 
The key to successful risk taking is to understand that the actions you’re taking should be the natural next step. One of the mistakes we often make when confronting a risk situation  is our tendency to focus on the end result. Skiers who are unsure of themselves often do this. They’ll go to the edge of a difficult slope, look all the way down to the bottom, and determine that the slope is too steep for them to try. The ones that decide to make it change their focus by analyzing what they need to do to master the first step, like getting through   the first mogul on the hill. Once they get there, they concentrate on the next mogul, and over the course of the run, they end up at the bottom of what others thought was an impossible mountain.
* mogul: 모굴(스키의 활주 사면에 있는 단단한 눈 더미)
① Separating the Possible from the Impossible
② Focus on the Next Step, Not the Final Result
③ Start with Ultimate Goals in  Mind!
④ The Wonders of Committed Efforts
⑤ Success Through Risk Avoidance













24. Georg Dionysius Ehret에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　The 18th century is called the Golden Age of botanical painting, and Georg Dionysius Ehret is often praised as the greatest botanical artist of the time. Born in Heidelberg, Germany, he was the son of a gardener who taught him much about art and nature. As a young man, Ehret traveled around Europe, largely on foot, observing plants and developing his artistic skills. In Holland, he became acquainted with the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus. Through his collaborations with Linnaeus and others, Ehret provided illustrations for a number of significant horticultural publications. Ehret’s reputation for scientific accuracy gained him many commissions from wealthy patrons, particularly in England, where he eventually settled.
* horticultural: 원예(학)의
① 18세기의 가장 위대한 식물 화가로서 칭송받는다.
② 정원사의 아들이었다.
③ 젊은 시절 주로 마차로 유럽을 여행하였다.
④ 다수의 원예 출판물에 삽화를 제공하였다.
⑤ 영국에 정착하였다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?

27. After-School Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?













　The above graph shows the percentages of Americans aged 12-17 who posted certain types of personal information on social media sites in 2006 and in 2012. ① The year 2012 saw an overall percentage increase in each category of posted personal information. ② In both years, the percentage of the young Americans who posted photos of themselves was the highest of all the categories. ③ In 2006, the percentage of those who posted city or town names was higher than that of those who posted school names. ④ Regarding posted email addresses, the percentage of 2012 was three times higher than that of 2006. ⑤ Compared to 2006, 2012 recorded an eighteen percent increase in the category of cell phone numbers.


26. Short Film Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?

SHORT FILM FESTIVAL
We will be hosting nine short films, which were written, directed, acted and produced by students from the College of Performing Arts & Film, Pamil University.
?Date: Friday, November 21, 2014
?Time: 7:00 pm－10:00 pm
?Place: Pamil Auditorium, Pamil University
?Price:
$10 (general admission)
$5 (discount for all university students with a valid ID)
- Tickets can be purchased from the student union office from Monday, November 17, 2014.
- All tickets are non-refundable.
- FREE beverage included in ticket price
?For more information, please call the student union office at (343) 777-8338.
① 교수들이 제작한 영화가 상영된다.
② 오전에 세 시간 동안 진행된다.
③ 영화 전공 학생에게만 입장료를 할인해 준다.
④ 입장권은 환불이 가능하다.
⑤ 무료 음료가 입장료에 포함된다.


AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM
December 1, 2014－January 30, 2015
           Are you looking for fun and exciting classes? Come on down to the Green Hills Community Center to check out our FREE program for local teens!
Classes
?Art, Music, Taekwondo
?Classes with fewer than 20 applicants will be canceled.
Time & Place
?The program will run from Monday to Friday (5:00 pm to 7:00 pm).
?All classes will take place in the Simpson Building.
How to sign up
?Registration forms must be sent by email to the address below by 6:00 pm, November 28. Please download the forms from our website at www.greenhills.org.
For additional information, please visit our website or send an email to bill@greenhills.org.

① 지역의 십 대들을 위한 무료 프로그램이다.
② 신청자가 20명 미만인 수업은 취소된다.
③ 모든 수업은 Simpson Building에서 진행된다.
④ 등록 신청서는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
⑤ 추가 정보는 웹사이트나 이메일을 이용하면 된다.






28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　During the early stages when the aquaculture industry was rapidly expanding, mistakes were made and these were costly both in terms of direct losses and in respect of the industry’s image. High-density rearing led to outbreaks of infectious diseases that in some cases ① devastated not just the caged fish, but local wild fish populations too. The negative impact on local wildlife inhabiting areas ② close to the fish farms continues to be an ongoing public relations problem for the industry. Furthermore, a general lack of knowledge and insufficient care being taken when fish pens were initially constructed ③ meaning that pollution from excess feed and fish waste created huge barren underwater deserts. These were costly lessons to learn, but now stricter regulations are  in  place to ensure that fish pens are placed in sites ④ where there is good water flow to remove fish waste. This, in addition to other methods that decrease the overall amount of uneaten food, ⑤ has helped aquaculture to clean up its act.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
　Nancy was struggling to see the positive when ① her teen daughter was experiencing a negative perspective on  her  life and abilities. In her desire to parent intentionally, ② she went into her daughter’s room and noted one positive accomplishment she had observed. “I know you’ve been having a hard time lately, and you aren’t feeling really good or  positive  about your life. But you did a great job cleaning up your  room  today, and ③ I know that must have been a big effort for you.” The next day, to Nancy’s surprise, the teen girl seemed somewhat cheerful. In passing, ④ she said, “Mom, thanks for saying the positive thing about me yesterday. I was feeling so down and couldn’t think of anything good about myself. After
⑤ you said that positive thing, it helped me see one good quality in myself, and I’ve been holding onto those words.”










30. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
　While the eye sees at the surface, the ear tends to penetrate below the surface. Joachim-Ernst Berendt points out that the ear is the only sense that (A) fuses / replaces an ability to measure with an ability to judge. We can discern different colors, but  we can give a precise number to different sounds. Our eyes do not let us perceive with this kind of (B) diversity / precision . An unmusical person can recognize an octave and, perhaps once instructed, a quality of tone, that is, a C or an F-sharp. Berendt points out that there are few ‘acoustical illusions’ ― something sounding like something that in fact it is not ― while there are many optical illusions. The ears do not lie. The sense of hearing gives us a remarkable connection with the invisible, underlying order of things. Through our ears we gain access to vibration, which (C) underlies / undermines everything  around us. The sense of tone and music in another’s voice gives us an enormous amount of information about that person, about her stance toward life, about her intentions.
* acoustical: 청각의

(A) (B)	(C)
① fuses	…… precision …… undermines
② replaces …… diversity …… underlies
③ fuses	…… diversity …… undermines
④ replaces  …… precision …… underlies
⑤ fuses	…… precision …… underlies

[31～33]  다음  빈칸에   들어갈   말로  가장  적절한   것을 고르시오.
31. The concept of humans doing multiple things at a time has been studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term “multitasking” didn’t exist until the 1960s. It was used to describe computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was so fast that a new word was needed to describe a computer’s ability to quickly perform many tasks. In retrospect, they probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking” is inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks alternately sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the context was flipped and it became interpreted to mean multiple tasks being done simultaneously by one resource (a person). It
was a clever turn of phrase that’s misleading, for even computers can process only one piece of code at a time. When they “multitask,” they switch back and forth, alternating their attention until both tasks are done. The speed with which computers  tackle multiple tasks 	that everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers to humans can be confusing. [3점]
① expels the myth	② feeds the illusion
③ conceals the fact	④ proves the hypothesis
⑤ blurs the conviction








32. My friend was disappointed that scientific progress has not cured the world’s ills by abolishing wars and starvation; that gross human inequality is still widespread; that happiness is  not universal. My friend made a common mistake ― a basic misunderstanding in the nature of knowledge. Knowledge is amoral ― not immoral but morality neutral. It can be used for any purpose, but many people assume it will be used to further their favorite hopes for society ― and this is the fundamental flaw. Knowledge of the world is one thing; its uses create a separate issue. To be disappointed that our progress in understanding has not remedied the social ills of the world is a legitimate view,  but 	. To argue that knowledge is not progressing because of the African or Middle Eastern conflicts misses the point. There is
nothing inherent in knowledge that dictates any specific social or moral application. [3점]
① to confuse this with the progress of knowledge is absurd
② to know the nature of knowledge is to practice its moral value
③ to remove social inequality is the inherent purpose of knowledge
④ to accumulate knowledge is to enhance its social application
⑤ to make science progress is to make it cure social ills




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. According to a renowned French scholar, the growth in the size and complexity of human populations was the driving force in the evolution of science. Early, small communities had to concentrate all their physical and mental effort on survival; their thoughts were focused on food and religion. As communities became larger, some people had time to reflect and debate. They found that they could understand and predict events better if they reduced passion and prejudice, replacing these with observation and inference. But while a large population may have been necessary, in itself it was not sufficient for science to germinate. Some empires were big,  but the rigid social control required to hold an empire together was not beneficial to science, just as it was not beneficial to reason.  The  early  nurturing  and  later  flowering  of  science
 	  to  support
original thought and freewheeling incentive. The rise in commerce and the decline of authoritarian religion allowed science to follow reason in seventeenth-century Europe. [3점]
* germinate: 싹트다, 발아하다
① prompted small communities to adopt harsh social norms
② resulted from passion and enthusiasm rather than inference
③ occurred in large communities with strict hierarchical structures
④ were solely attributed to efforts of survival in a small community
⑤ required a large and loosely structured, competitive community



34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? New media can be defined by four characteristics simultaneously: they are media at the turn of the 20th and 21st centuries which are both integrated and interactive and use
digital code and hypertext as technical means. It follows that their most common alternative names are multimedia, interactive media and digital media. By using this definition,   it is  easy  to  identify  media  as  old  or  new.  (A) , traditional television is integrated as it contains images, sound and text, but it is not interactive or based on digital code. The plain old telephone was interactive, but not integrated as it  only transmitted speech and sounds and it did not work with digital code. In contrast, the new medium of interactive television adds interactivity and digital code.        (B)         ,   the new generations of mobile or fixed telephony are fully digitalized and integrated as they add text, pictures or video and they are connected to the Internet.
(A) (B)
① For example …… Additionally
② Nevertheless …… In other words
③ Therefore …… Additionally
④ For example …… In other words
⑤ Nevertheless …… Consequently
35. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　A currently popular attitude is to blame technology or technologists for having brought on the environmental problems we face today, and thus to try to slow technological advance by blocking economic growth. We believe this view  to be thoroughly misguided. ① If technology produced automobiles that pollute the air, it is because pollution was not recognized as a problem which engineers had to consider in their designs. ② Solar energy can be a practical alternative energy source for us in the foreseeable future. ③ Obviously, technology that produces pollution is generally cheaper, but now that it has been decided that cleaner cars are wanted, less polluting cars will be produced; cars which scarcely pollute at all could even be made. ④ This last option, however, would require several years and much investment. ⑤ Although technology is responsive to the will of the people, it can  seldom respond instantaneously and is never free.






[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에  이어질  글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
36. 

　The impact of color has been studied for decades. For example, in a factory, the temperature was maintained at 72℉ and the walls were painted a cool blue-green. The employees complained of the cold.

(A) The psychological effects of warm and cool hues seem to be used effectively by the coaches of the Notre Dame football team. The locker rooms used for half-time breaks were reportedly painted to take advantage of the  emotional impact of certain hues.
(B) The home-team room was painted a bright  red,  which kept team members excited or even angered. The visiting-team room was painted a blue-green, which had a calming effect on the team members. The success of this application of color can be noted in the records set by Notre Dame football teams.
(C) The temperature was maintained at the same level, but the walls were painted a warm coral. The employees stopped complaining about the temperature and reported  they  were quite comfortable.
* hue: 색조, 색상
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7

37.	39.



(A) They walk only a few miles each day and may use the same campsite for several nights. Survival eaters  eat  some dry cereal for breakfast, and are up and walking within minutes of waking.
(B) Wilderness dining has two extremes: gourmet eaters and survival eaters. The first like to make camp at lunchtime  so they have several hours to set up field ovens; they bake cakes and bread and cook multi-course dinners.
(C) They walk dozens of miles every day; lunch is a series of cold snacks eaten on the move. Dinner consists of a freeze-dried meal, “cooked” by pouring hot water into the package.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)






[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
　
Some years ago, a psychologist named Richard Lippa called a group of introverts to his lab and asked them to act like extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. ( ① ) Then he and his team, with video cameras in hand, measured the length of their strides, the amount of eye contact they made with their “students,” the percentage of time they spent  talking, and the volume of their speech. (  ② )  Then Lippa  did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the results. ( ③ ) He found that although the latter group came across as more extroverted, some of the fake extroverts were surprisingly convincing. ( ④ ) It seems  that  most  of  us  know how to fake it to some extent. ( ⑤ ) Whether or not we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of time we spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and extroverts, we know it unconsciously. [3점]


40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?





　Exactly how cicadas keep track of time has always intrigued researchers, and it has always been assumed that the insects must rely on an internal clock. Recently, however, one group  of scientists working with the 17-year cicada in  California have suggested that the nymphs use an external cue and that they can count. ( ① ) For their experiments they took 15-year-old nymphs and moved them to an experimental enclosure. ( ② ) These nymphs should have taken a further two years to emerge as adults, but in fact they took just one year. ( ③ ) By doing this, the trees were “tricked” into flowering twice during the year rather than the usual once.    ( ④ ) Flowering in trees coincides with a peak in amino acid concentrations in the sap that the insects feed on. ( ⑤ ) So it seems that the cicadas keep track of time by counting the peaks.
* nymph: 애벌레
** sap: 수액













(A)	(B)	(A)	(B)
① unavoidable …… differ	② direct	…… converge
③ temporary	…… fluctuate	④ unexpected …… converge
⑤ favorable	…… differ




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.

(B)


(C)
　After graduation, Jeremy joined an organization that recruits future leaders to teach in low-income communities.
(c) He was assigned to a small school in a poor rural county  in North Carolina. Later, his assistant principal took note of Jeremy’s high expectations and asked him to take over (d) his math class. He took charge of about a dozen failing “special ed” kids, and Tisha and Kelly were among them. His idealism   ran high, and he thought he would be able to magically fix   all of their problems.














41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Why the Number of Group Members Counts
② Individuality vs. Collectivity in the Workplace
③ Equal Opportunities: Toward Maximum Satisfaction
④ How to Cope with Conflicts in Groups
⑤ Agreement on Group Size Pays Off!

42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① probe	② escape	③ mirror
④ trigger	⑤ escalate

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
(D) 

　Jeremy knew something had to change. (e) He then thought back to my class, remembering how negative emotions can drag you down, leaving positive emotions unnoticed. That’s when he decided to focus more on building positive attitudes within the classroom. He borrowed lessons from my positive psychology class and even mentioned my name to his students. As the students’ attitudes became more optimistic, their confidence with math grew too. At the end of the school year, 80 percent of Jeremy’s students passed the state’s math test.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 위 글의 Jeremy에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 대학에서 긍정 심리학을 수강했다.
② 많은 시간을 들여 수업 계획서를 준비했다.
③ 스트레스로 인해 교실에 들어가기를 두려워했다.
④ 저소득 지역에서 가르칠 미래 지도자를 모집하는 단체에 가입했다.
⑤ 학년말에 그의 학생의 80퍼센트가 수학 시험에 불합격했다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지	1
6. 대화를  듣고, 그림에서  대화의  내용과  일치하지  않는 것을 고르시오.




1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No, thanks. I’ll have one later.
② Sure. Take as many as you want.
③ Well, he’s quite a diligent farmer.
④ Sorry, but apples aren’t my favorite.
⑤ Good idea. Let’s buy them at the market.




2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Don’t worry. The forecast says it’ll clear up soon.
② You’re too late. Your flight already departed.
③ Then, I’d like to get a refund for this ticket.
④ That’s right. We can reschedule your meeting.
⑤ No problem. We’ll change your seat to the aisle side.



3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 사용 시 올바른 자세에 대해 조언하려고
② 컴퓨터 사용 중 휴식의 필요성을 강조하려고
③ 컴퓨터 사용 관련 절전 요령을 설명하려고
④ 회사 내 컴퓨터 보안 강화 방침을 안내하려고
⑤ 직장 내 컴퓨터 개인 용무 사용 자제를 당부하려고


4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 교사는 수업 시 학생들의 개인차를 고려할 필요가 있다.
② 원만한 교우 관계는 학습 동기를 강화시킨다.
③ 게임을 이용한 수업은 학습에 도움이 된다.
④ 효과적인 수업을 위한 게임 개발이 중요하다.
⑤ 조용한 학습 분위기가 수업 진행에 필수적이다.



5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 치과 접수원 － 환자	② 보건 교사 － 학생
③ 심리 상담사 － 내담자	④ 약사 － 제약 회사 직원
⑤ 보험 설계사 － 고객
7. 
대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 학급 친구들 인터뷰하기
② 조별 발표 순서 정하기
③ 인터넷 자료 검색하기
④ 발표 주제 선정하기
⑤ 과학 과제 제출하기

8. 대화를  듣고, 남자가  팀  회식에  참석할  수  없는  이유를 고르시오.
① 아버지와 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
② 어머니 병문안을 가야 해서
③ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
④ 팀 프로젝트 준비를 해야 해서
⑤ 아버지 생신 선물을 사러 가야 해서

9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $27	② $30	③ $35	④ $36	⑤ $40


10. 대화를 듣고, Young Inventors Challenge에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 것을 고르시오.
① 참가 연령	② 지원 마감일	③ 대회 장소
④ 참가비	⑤ 우승 상품

11. Sunnyvale  Community  Closet에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 비영리 단체가 운영한다.
② 기증받기 전에 기기가 작동하는지 점검한다.
③ 기기 보관을 위한 공간이 제한적이다.
④ 주말에는 오후 5시까지 연다.
⑤ 기증자에게 회원 카드를 발급한다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

2	


12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 보러 가기로 선택한 아파트를 고르시오.
Apartments in Westford Village


①
②
③
④
⑤

13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:   	
① That’s too bad. The submission date has passed.
② Sure. They’ll make a back-up file just in case.
③ Trust yourself. Your efforts will pay off.
④ It’s not your fault. Wait for another chance.
⑤ No problem. The directors’ meeting was canceled.

14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:   	
① Right. I’d like to send this package by express mail.
② Yes. I want to buy some stamps to put on this letter.
③ Great! Please give me the whole flower series now.
④ That’s good. But those aren’t the stamps you want.
⑤ Thanks! I’ll go there now before they’re sold out.

15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Jane에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:   	
① I’m going to hire you as my speechwriter.
② You’re the right person to give me advice.
③ I wouldn’t make a single change if I were you.
④ You should’ve written the speech on your own.
⑤ I think it’s better to soften the speech a little bit.

[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① avoiding insect bites in the wild
② distinguishing species of insects
③ insects’ self-protection methods
④ means of saving endangered insects
⑤ a variety of insects’ hunting techniques

17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① ants	② butterflies	③ beetles
④ grasshoppers	⑤ bees


18. 
다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?


Dear Coach Johnson,
　My name is Christina Markle, Bradley Markle’s mother. Bradley and I were thrilled to learn that you’re holding your Gymnastics Summer Camp again this year. So I didn’t hesitate to sign up and pay the non-refundable deposit for the second week program, which is from July 13 to 17. But today I remembered that our family is going to get back from a trip on July 13, and I’m afraid Bradley won’t be able to make it on the very first day of the program. Rather than make him skip the day, I’d like to check to see if he could switch to the third week program. Please let us know if that’s possible. Thank you.
Sincerely, Christina Markle

① 캠프 참가를 위해 여행 일정을 조정하려고
② 캠프 참가 시기를 변경할 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 캠프 등록 시 지불한 예치금 환불을 요구하려고
④ 캠프 일정이 분명하지 않은 것에 대해 항의하려고
⑤ 예약한 캠프 프로그램의 변경된 내용을 확인하려고

19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　I’m leaving early tomorrow morning, finally! I’ve always wanted to explore the Amazon, the unknown and mysterious world. At this hour, the great Emerald Amazon Explorer should be at the port waiting for me to get on board. Freshwater dolphins will escort me on the playful river, and 500 species of birds, half a dozen species of monkeys, and numerous colorful butterflies will welcome me into their kingdom. I wish I could camp in the wild and enjoy the company of mosquitos, snakes, and spiders. I’d love to make the world’s largest rainforest home. My heart swells as much as my chubby bags; yet, I’d better get some sleep since a long, tough journey is ahead of me.
① excited	② exhausted	③ frustrated
④ indifferent	⑤ relieved

20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Assertiveness may seem to some people to be uncharacteristic of counselors. If your picture of a counselor is someone who never disagrees, always “goes along,” wants everything to be nice all the time, and only does what other people want him or her to do, this is not a picture of an assertive counselor. Being assertive does not have to mean being disagreeable. Being a counselor does not mean that you should simply be silent when someone tells a racist joke. An assertive counselor would find a way to call that person’s attention to the fact that the joke is racist, explaining how it offended the hearer, and suggesting ways similar jokes could be avoided. Being assertive is a highly developed skill ― it should fit nicely in the counselor’s repertoire of techniques.
① 상담사는 상대방의 감정을 해치는 농담을 하지 말아야 한다.
② 상담사는 자기 생각을 분명하게 드러낼 줄도 알아야 한다.
③ 상담사는 항상 친절한 태도로 상담을 진행해야 한다.
④ 상담사는 정기적으로 상담 기술 교육을 받아야 한다.
⑤ 상담사는 상담 기록을 철저히 관리해야 한다.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 3


21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The negative effects of extrinsic motivators such as grades have been documented with students from different cultures. Although this matter is more complex than simply regarding  all extrinsic rewards as controlling or  diminishing  learning, we agree with Richard Ryan and his colleagues that people across different cultures are likely to express more satisfaction with their lives when their primary goals are intrinsic rather than extrinsic. Another consistent research finding is  that  when a learning activity is undertaken explicitly to  attain  some extrinsic reward, people respond by seeking the least demanding way of ensuring the reward. Since there are three decades of evidence that dominating instruction with a system of controlling external rewards may contribute to inferior learning, using a pedagogy based on theories of intrinsic motivation appears to be a more reasonable and effective approach to enhancing learning among culturally diverse students.
* pedagogy: 교수법
① 적절한 외적 보상이 삶의 만족도를 향상시킨다.
② 학습자의 외적 동기와 내적 동기의 균형이 필요하다.
③ 문화적 다양성을 고려한 교육 이론의 확립이 중요하다.
④ 내적 동기의 교육적 기능에 대한 실질적인 연구가 시급하다.
⑤ 내적 동기 부여가 문화적 배경이 다른 학생들의 교육에 효과적이다.






22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
　Twin sirens hide in the sea of history, tempting those  seeking to understand and appreciate the past onto the reefs of misunderstanding and misinterpretation. These twin dangers are temporocentrism and ethnocentrism. Temporocentrism is the belief that your times are the best of all possible times. All other times are thus inferior. Ethnocentrism is the belief that your culture is the best of all possible cultures. All other cultures are thus inferior. Temporocentrism and ethnocentrism unite to cause individuals and cultures to judge all other individuals and cultures by the “superior” standards of their current culture. This leads to a total lack of perspective when dealing with past and / or foreign cultures and a resultant misunderstanding and misappreciation of them. Temporocentrism and ethnocentrism tempt moderns into unjustified criticisms   of the peoples of the past.
① distinct differences in the ways of recording history
② universal features discovered in different cultures
③ historians’ efforts to advocate their own culture
④ pros and cons of two cross-cultural perspectives
⑤ beliefs that cause biased interpretations of the past
23. 
다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
　When we remark with surprise that someone “looks young” for his or her chronological age, we are observing that we  all age biologically at different rates. Scientists have good evidence that this apparent difference is real. It is likely that age changes begin in different parts of the body at different times and that the rate of annual change varies among various cells, tissues, and organs, as well as from person to person. Unlike the passage of time, biological aging resists easy measurement. What we would like to have is one or a few measurable biological changes that mirror all other biological age changes without reference to the passage of time, so that we could say, for example, that someone who is chronologically eighty years old is biologically sixty years old. This kind of measurement would help explain why one eighty-year-old has so many more youthful qualities than does another eighty-year-old, who may be biologically eighty or even ninety years old.
① In Search of a Mirror Reflecting Biological Aging
② Reasons for Slow Aging in the Modern Era
③ A Few Tips to Guess Chronological Age
④ Secrets of Biological Aging Disclosed
⑤ Looking for the Fountain of Youth

24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?














　The above graph shows the results of a survey conducted in 2012. It compares the percentage of parents of minor children (hereafter, parents) and that of other adults in terms of their involvement in six library activities. ① Most notably, the percentage of parents is higher than that of other adults in all activity types. ② The percentage of parents who browsed shelves is the same as that of parents who borrowed print books. ③ The percentage gap between parents and other  adults is largest in the activity of attending classes or events  for children and is smallest in the activity of using computers or the Internet. ④ The percentage of other adults who browsed shelves is twice as high as that of other adults who borrowed DVDs, CDs, or videotapes. ⑤ Finally, the percentage of parents who borrowed e-books is less than 10% but is higher than that of other adults who did the same activity.




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

4	


25. Protogenes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
　Known for his devotion to each of his paintings, Protogenes was an ancient Greek painter and a rival of Apelles. He was born in Caunus, on the coast of Caria, but lived most of his   life in Rhodes. Little else is known of him.  But  there  are some accounts of his paintings. The Ialysus and the Satyr were the most well-known among his works. Protogenes spent approximately seven years painting the Ialysus, a depiction of a local hero of a town in Rhodes. After remaining in Rhodes for at least 200 years, it was carried off to Rome. There later it  was destroyed by fire. Protogenes worked on the Satyr during Demetrius Poliorcetes’ attack on Rhodes from 305 to 304 B.C. Interestingly, the garden in which he painted the Satyr was in the middle of the enemy’s camp. Protogenes is said to have been about seventy years of age when the Satyr was completed.
① 고대 그리스 화가였다.
② 일생의 대부분을 Rhodes에서 지냈다.
③ Ialysus를 그리는 데 대략 7년을 보냈다.
④ 적진과 멀리 떨어진 곳에서 Satyr를 그렸다.
⑤ Satyr를 완성했을 때는 약 70세였다고 전해진다.

26. 2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
27. 
Virginia Art Show 2015에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?


Virginia Art Show 2015
　We invite you to join us at the 20th Virginia Art Show, famed all along the east coast for the variety and quality of its exhibits. Works by famous artists such as Mabel Green, Theresa Peterson, and Ronald McKuen will be displayed. The Virginia Philharmonic will perform  on the first day of the show.
　Come and enjoy the fabulous drawings, sculptures, photographs, digital works, and the great music!
?Dates: November 1－30
?Hours: 10:00 a.m.－ 9:00 p.m.
?Place: Westchester Art Center
?Entrance Fees:
- Adults: $15 one day
- Children: $7 one day
Free admission for Virginia residents
　For further information, please visit our website at www.virginiaartshow.org.



2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference
November 21 & 22, 10:00 a.m.－ 5:00 p.m.
Hosted by the Teen Programmers Association
　Is the computer screen your universe? Then join our conference held at West State University’s Brilliance Hall, and challenge yourself! Here you’ll meet the leaders in modern computer science.
The conference includes:
?Lectures  by  renowned  industry  figures,  including Warwick Meade
?10 separate seminars on hardware / software, programming, and new applications
?Exhibitions of their latest products by 12 major firms
Ticket Prices:
?Total Pass: $25 (includes buffet lunch)
?Lectures & Seminars Only: $15
?Exhibitions Only: $10
　Booking is essential. Reserve your tickets at www.tiinprogrammers.org.

① 3일간 진행된다.
② 시청의 대강당에서 개최된다.
③ 12개의 개별 세미나가 열린다.
④ Total Pass에 점심 뷔페가 포함된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.

① 스무 번째 개최되는 행사이다.
② 유명한 예술가의 작품이 전시된다.
③ 행사 첫날 Virginia Philharmonic의 공연이 있다.
④ 두 달 동안 열린다.
⑤ Virginia  주민의 무료입장이 가능하다.


28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
　The Greeks’ focus on the salient object and its attributes led to ① their failure to understand the fundamental nature of causality. Aristotle explained that a stone falling through the  air is due to the stone having the property of “gravity.” But of course a piece of wood ② tossed into water floats instead of sinking. This phenomenon Aristotle explained as being due   to the wood having the property of “levity”! In  both cases  the focus is ③ exclusively on the object, with  no attention paid to the possibility that some force outside  the  object  might be relevant. But the Chinese saw the world as consisting of continuously interacting substances, so their attempts to understand it ④ causing them to be oriented toward the complexities of the entire “field,” that is, the context or environment as a whole. The notion ⑤ that events always occur in a field of forces would have been  completely  intuitive to the Chinese.
* salient: 현저한, 두드러진
** levity: 가벼움




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 5


29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 것은?
　The Atitl?n Giant Grebe was a large, flightless bird that had evolved from the much more widespread and smaller Pied-billed Grebe. By 1965 there were only around 80 birds left on Lake Atitl?n. One immediate reason was easy enough  to spot: the local human population was cutting down the reed beds at a furious rate. This (A) accommodation / destruction was driven by the needs of a fast growing mat-making  industry. But there were other problems. An American airline was intent on developing the lake as a tourist destination for fishermen. However, there was a major problem with  this  idea: the lake (B) lacked / supported any suitable  sporting  fish! To compensate for this rather obvious defect, a specially selected species of fish called the Large-mouthed Bass was introduced. The introduced individuals immediately turned their attentions to the crabs and small fish that lived in the lake, thus (C) competing / cooperating with the few remaining grebes for food. There is also little doubt that they sometimes gobbled up the zebra-striped Atitl?n Giant Grebe’s chicks.
* reed: 갈대
** gobble up: 게걸스럽게 먹다
(A) (B)	(C)
① accommodation …… lacked …… competing
② accommodation …… supported …… cooperating
③ destruction …… lacked …… competing
④ destruction          …… supported  …… cooperating
⑤ destruction          …… lacked       …… cooperating



30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? The dancers stood on a two-step elevated stage, so that there was a natural gap between those who came to dance and those who came to watch. The host randomly pulled the name of a
well-known dancer, Linx, out of a hat. People cheered. According to the format, Linx had to “call out” another dancer to battle him on stage. Instead of deliberately choosing someone, however, ① he decided to select his opponent randomly by making himself into a human spin-wheel. He propelled himself into a backspin, covered ② his eyes, and extended his arm above his head. When his body finally stopped spinning, ③ his arm pointed away from the dancers on stage and directly at Dan Tres, standing among the spectators. The crowd erupted in “Ohhhhs!” because  ④ he was an older family man who had not danced hip-hop in many years, while the much younger Linx was a nimble b-boy. Linx looked embarrassed, but nonetheless ⑤ he called out the respected elder to battle.
* nimble: 동작이 날렵한

[31～34]  다음  빈칸에   들어갈   말로  가장  적절한   것을 고르시오.
31. When two cultures come into contact, they do  not  exchange every cultural item. If that were the case, there  would be no cultural differences in the world today. Instead, only a small number of cultural elements ever spread from   one culture to another. Which cultural item is accepted  depends largely on the item’s use and compatibility with already existing cultural traits. For example, it is not  likely  that men’s hair dyes designed to “get out the gray” will spread into parts of rural Africa where a person’s status is elevated with  advancing  years.  Even   when  a(n) 	is consistent with a society’s needs, there is still no guarantee  that  it  will  be  accepted.  For  example,  most  people  in  the
United States using US customary units (e.g., inch, foot, yard, mile, etc.) have resisted adopting the metric system even though making such a change would enable US citizens to interface with the rest of the world more efficiently. [3점]
* metric system: 미터법
① categorization	② innovation
③ investigation	④ observation
⑤ specification







32. Some distinctions between good and bad are hardwired into our biology. Infants enter the world ready to respond to pain as bad and to sweet (up to a point) as good. In many situations, however, the boundary between good and bad is a reference point that changes over time and depends on the immediate circumstances. Imagine that you are out in the country on a cold night, inadequately dressed for the pouring rain, your clothes soaked. A stinging cold wind completes your misery. As you wander around, you find a large rock that provides some shelter from the fury of the elements. The biologist Michel Cabanac would call the experience of that moment intensely pleasurable because it functions, as pleasure normally does, to indicate the direction of 	. The pleasant relief will not last very long, of course, and you will soon be shivering behind the rock again, driven by your renewed suffering to seek better shelter. [3점]
* shiver: 떨다
① a permanent emotional adjustment to circumstantial demands
② enhancing self-consciousness through physical suffering
③ a biologically significant improvement of circumstances
④ judging desirable and undesirable conditions impartially
⑤ a mentally pre-determined inclination for emotional stability




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

6	


33. Research and development for seed improvement has long been a public domain and government activity  for  the common good. However, private capital started to flow into seed production and took it over as a sector of the economy, creating an artificial split between the two aspects of  the  seed’s nature: its role as means of production and its role as product. This process gained pace after the invention  of  hybrid breeding of maize in the late 1920s. Today most maize seed cultivated are hybrids. The companies that sell them are able to keep the distinct parent lines from farmers, and the grain that they produce is not suited for seed saving and replanting. The combination guarantees that farmers will
have to 	. In the 1990s the extension of patent laws as the only intellectual property rights tool into the area of seed varieties started to create a growing market for private seed companies. [3점]
* maize: 옥수수
① buy more seed from the company each season
② use more chemical fertilizer than before
③ pioneer markets for their food products
④ increase the efficiency of food production
⑤ search for ways to maintain rural communities




34. Long before Walt Whitman wrote Leaves of Grass, poets had addressed themselves to fame. Horace, Petrarch, Shakespeare, Milton, and Keats all hoped that poetic greatness would grant them a kind of earthly immortality. Whitman held a similar faith that for centuries the world would value his poems. But  to this ancient desire to live forever on the page, he added a new sense of fame. Readers would not simply attend to the poet’s work; they would be attracted to the greatness of his personality. They would see in his poems a vibrant cultural performance, an individual springing from the book with tremendous charisma and appeal. Out of the political rallies  and electoral parades that marked Jacksonian America, Whitman
defined poetic fame in relation to the crowd. Other  poets  might look for their inspiration from the goddess of poetry. Whitman’s  poet  sought 	. In the instability of American democracy, fame would be dependent on celebrity, on the degree to which the people rejoiced in the poet and his work. [3점]
* rally: 집회
① a refuge from public attention
② poetic purity out of political chaos
③ immortality in literature itself
④ the approval of his contemporaries
⑤ fame with political celebrities

[35～36] 주어진 글 다음에  이어질  글의  순서로  가장  적절한 것을 고르시오.
35. 


(A) They train for marathons, quit smoking, switch fields, write plays, take up the guitar, or learn to tango even if they never danced before in their lives. What is the difference between these two groups of people?
(B) But they wear their hair the same way, buy the  same  brand of shoes, eat the same breakfast, and stick to routines for no reason other than the ease of a  comfortable, predictable life. Yet as both  research  and real life show, many others do make important changes.
(C) It’s their perspective. People who change do not question whether change is possible or look for reasons  they  cannot change. They simply decide on a change  they  want and do what is necessary to accomplish  it.  Changing, which always stems from a firm decision, becomes job number one.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)

36. 


(A) Avoidance training, however, doesn’t always work in our favor. For instance, a child who has been repeatedly criticized for poor performance on math may learn to dodge difficult math problems in order to avoid further punishment.
(B) Unfortunately, because of this avoidance, the child fails   to develop his math skills and therefore improve the capabilities he has, and so a vicious cycle has set in. The avoidance must be unlearned through some positive experiences with math in order for this cycle to be broken.
(C) Psychologists call this avoidance training because the person is learning to avoid the possibility of a punishing consequence. Avoidance training is responsible for many everyday behaviors. It has taught you to  carry  an umbrella when it looks like rain to avoid the punishment of getting wet, and to keep your hand away from a hot  iron to avoid the punishment of a burn.
① (A) － (C) － (B)	② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)	④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

	 7


[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳을 고르시오.
37. 

Surprised by the vision of an unfamiliar silhouette pushing into the house, these dogs were using their eyes instead of their noses.

　Remember when you were little and you imagined that  adults had infinite power? Surely someone who could drive  the car, open the juice container, and reach the sink  could make it stop raining. ( ① ) I think that’s the same expectation that we have with respect to our dogs and their  ability  to smell. (  ② ) Because they are so good at using their noses,  we assume that they can smell anything, anytime. ( ③ ) But dogs use other senses, too, and the  brains  of  both  humans and dogs tend to intensify one sense at a time. ( ④ ) Many owners have been snapped at by their dogs when  they  returned home with a new hairdo or a new coat. ( ⑤ ) Their noses may be remarkable, but they’re not always switched on.
39. 
다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
　Food intake is essential for the survival of every living organism. The failure to detect spoiled or  toxic  food  can  have deadly consequences. Therefore, it is not surprising that humans use all their five senses to analyze food quality. ① A first judgment about the value of a  food  source is  made on its appearance and smell. ② Food that looks and smells attractive is taken into the mouth. ③ The value of a particular food is an estimation of how good it is, based on its level of vitamins, minerals, or calories. ④ Here, based on a complex sensory analysis that is not only restricted to the sense of taste but also includes smell, touch, and hearing, the final decision whether to swallow or reject food is  made. ⑤ Frequently, this complex interaction between different senses is inappropriately referred to as ‘taste’ although it should be  better called flavor perception, because it  uses  multiple senses.





40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?











38.

Even so, it is not the money per se that is valuable, but the fact that it can potentially yield more positive experiences.

Money ― beyond the bare minimum necessary for food and

shelter ― is nothing more than a means to an end. Yet so often we confuse means with ends, and sacrifice happiness (end) for money (means). It is easy to do this when material wealth is elevated to the position of the ultimate end, as it so often is in our society. ( ① ) This is not to say that the accumulation and production of material wealth is in itself wrong. ( ② ) Material prosperity can help individuals, as well as society, attain higher levels of happiness. ( ③ ) Financial security can liberate us from work we do not find meaningful and from having to worry about the next paycheck. ( ④ ) Moreover, the desire to make money can challenge and inspire us. ( ⑤ ) Material wealth in and of itself does not necessarily generate meaning or lead to emotional wealth. [3점]
* per se: 그 자체로








(A) (B)
① contextual	…… put aside
② contextual	…… rely on
③ controllable …… put aside
④ positive	…… ignore
⑤ positive	…… rely on




이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.

8	


[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(B) 






































41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Does Basic Science Bring to Us?
② The Crisis of Researchers in Basic Science
③ Common Goals of Science and Technology
④ Technology: The Ultimate Aim of Basic Science
⑤ Michael Faraday, Frontiersman of the Electronic Age!

42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① applicable	② impractical	③ inaccurate
④ priceless	⑤ resourceful

[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)

(C)
　Hannah struggled with the many class hours, the endless assignments, and the exams. However, there were exciting events like sports days and school festivals. How could (c) she ever forget her second year! She had sung and danced with  her friends in the festival, part of a sensational performance. After that, she had become more confident and active. Her thoughts wandering, Hannah vaguely heard her mother’s voice. “Here you are!” Her mother hurried over, and gave
(d) her a bundle of lilies and roses and a big hug.

(D)
　That day was unusually foggy as if something mysterious were ahead. Hannah was nervous and trembling. The principal was energetically addressing them, talking of the challenges and thrills of high school life, but she could not concentrate. Later, a tall, strict-looking man introduced himself as (e) her homeroom teacher. The classroom was old, but neat and inviting. Hannah was seated in the fifth row, hallway side, even though she had wanted a window seat. High school life soon proved as challenging as the principal had predicted.

43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)	② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)	④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)

44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)	② (b)	③ (c)	④ (d)	⑤ (e)

45. 윗글의 Hannah에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 다른 신입생들과 함께 운동장에 서 있었다.
② 학교 정원에서 선생님들과 사진을 찍었다.
③ 축제에서 노래를 부르고 춤을 추었다.
④ 교장 선생님의 말씀에 집중할 수가 없었다.
⑤ 교실에서 다섯 번째 줄 창가 자리에 앉았다.





이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.


